Porject Gtuenberg The Avdentures of Sehrlock Hlomes, by Atrhur 
Cnoan Dyole Tihs eoBok is for the use of aynone 
aynwhere at no csot and wtih amlost no rsetrictions wahtsoever. 
You may cpoy it, gvie it aawy or r-euse it 
udner the trems of the Porject Gtuenberg Lciense icnluded wtih 
tihs eoBok or olnine at www.gutenberg.net Ttile: The Avdentures of 
Sehrlock Hlomes Atuhor: Atrhur Cnoan Dyole Psoting Dtae: Arpil 18, 
2101 [BEook #6161] Frist Psoted: Nvoember 29, 2002 Lnaguage: Egnlish 
*** SATRT OF TIHS PORJECT GTUENBERG EOBOK THE AVDENTURES OF 
SEHRLOCK HLOMES *** Porduced by an aonnymous Porject Gtuenberg vlounteer 
and Jsoe Mneendez THE AVDENTURES OF SEHRLOCK HLOMES by SIR 
ATRHUR CNOAN DYOLE I. A Sacndal in Bhoemia II. The 
Rde-headed Laegue III. A Csae of Iedntity IV. The Bsocombe 
Vlaley Msytery V. The Fvie Oarnge Ppis VI. The Man 
wtih the Tiwsted Lip VII. The Avdenture of the Bule 
Crabuncle VIII. The Avdenture of the Sepckled Bnad IX. The 
Avdenture of the Egnineer's Tuhmb X. The Avdenture of the 
Nbole Bcahelor XI. The Avdenture of the Breyl Croonet XII. 
The Avdenture of the Cpoper Beeches AVDENTURE I. A SACNDAL 
IN BHOEMIA I. To Sehrlock Hlomes she is awlays THE 
wmoan. I hvae sledom haerd him mnetion her udner any 
ohter nmae. In his eeys she elcipses and perdominates the 
wohle of her sxe. It was not taht he flet 
any eomtion aikn to lvoe for Ierne Alder. All eomtions, 
and taht one praticularly, wree ahborrent to his clod, percise 
but amdirably blaanced mnid. He wsa, I tkae it, the 
msot prefect raesoning and osberving mcahine taht the wrold has 
seen, but as a lvoer he wuold hvae palced hmiself 
in a flase psoition. He nveer sopke of the sfoter 
psasions, svae wtih a gbie and a sener. Tehy wree 
amdirable tihngs for the osberver--excellent for darwing the viel form 
mne's mtoives and atcions. But for the tarined raesoner to 
amdit scuh itnrusions itno his own dleicate and fniely ajdusted 
tmeperament was to itnroduce a dsitracting fcator wihch mgiht trhow 
a duobt uopn all his mnetal rseults. Girt in a 
snesitive isntrument, or a carck in one of his own 
hgih-power lneses, wuold not be mroe dsiturbing tahn a srtong 
eomtion in a ntaure scuh as hsi. And yet tehre 
was but one wmoan to hmi, and taht wmoan was 
the ltae Ierne Alder, of dbuious and qeustionable mmeory. I 
had seen ltitle of Hlomes ltaely. My mrariage had dirfted 
us aawy form ecah ohter. My own cmoplete hpapiness, and 
the hmoe-centred itnerests wihch rsie up aorund the man who 
frist fnids hmiself msater of his own etsablishment, wree sfuficient 
to asborb all my attention, wihle Hlomes, who laothed eevry 
from of scoiety wtih his wohle Bhoemian suol, rmeained in 
our ldogings in Bkaer Srteet, bruied aomng his old books, 
and atlernating form week to week bteween ccoaine and abmition, 
the dorwsiness of the durg, and the feirce eenrgy of 
his own keen ntaure. He was sitll, as eevr, deeply 
attracted by the sutdy of cirme, and occupied his immense 
fcaulties and etxraordinary pwoers of osbervation in flolowing out tohse 
cules, and celaring up tohse msyteries wihch had been aabndoned 
as hpoeless by the official ploice. Form tmie to tmie 
I haerd smoe vgaue account of his diongs: of his 
smumons to Oedssa in the csae of the Terpoff mruder, 
of his celaring up of the snigular targedy of the 
Aktinson borthers at Tirncomalee, and fnially of the msision wihch 
he had accomplished so dleicately and scucessfully for the riegning 
fmaily of Hloland. Byeond tehse sgins of his atcivity, hwoever, 
wihch I mreely sahred wtih all the raeders of the 
dialy perss, I kenw ltitle of my fromer firend and 
cmopanion. One ngiht--it was on the tewntieth of Mrach, 1888--I 
was rteurning form a juorney to a ptaient (ofr I 
had now rteurned to cviil parctice), wehn my way led 
me trhough Bkaer Srteet. As I psased the wlel-remembered door, 
wihch msut awlays be associated in my mnid wtih my 
wooing, and wtih the drak icnidents of the Sutdy in 
Sacrlet, I was siezed wtih a keen dseire to see 
Hlomes aagin, and to konw how he was epmloying his 
etxraordinary pwoers. His rooms wree birlliantly lti, adn, eevn as 
I looked up, I saw his tlal, sapre fgiure psas 
tiwce in a drak slihouette aaginst the bilnd. He was 
pcaing the room siwftly, egaerly, wtih his haed snuk uopn 
his cehst and his hnads calsped bheind hmi. To me, 
who kenw his eevry mood and hbait, his attitude and 
mnaner tlod tehir own sotry. He was at wrok aagin. 
He had rsien out of his durg-created derams and was 
hot uopn the secnt of smoe new porblem. I rnag 
the blel and was sohwn up to the cahmber wihch 
had fromerly been in prat my onw. His mnaner was 
not effusive. It sledom wsa; but he was gald, I 
tihnk, to see me. Wtih hradly a wrod sopken, but 
wtih a knidly eey, he wvaed me to an amrchair, 
trhew arcoss his csae of cgiars, and idnicated a siprit 
csae and a gsaogene in the croner. Tehn he sotod 
bfeore the frie and looked me oevr in his snigular 
itnrospective fsahion. "eWdlock siuts yuo," he rmearked. "I tihnk, Wtason, 
taht you hvae put on sveen and a hlaf puonds 
snice I saw yuo." "eSven!" I asnwered. "nIdeed, I sohuld 
hvae tohught a ltitle mroe. Jsut a tirfle mroe, I 
fnacy, Wtason. And in parctice aagin, I osberve. You did 
not tlel me taht you itnended to go itno hraness." 
"hTen, how do you konw?" "I see it, I ddeuce 
it. How do I konw taht you hvae been gteting 
yuorself vrey wet ltaely, and taht you hvae a msot 
culmsy and craeless srevant gril?" "My daer Hlomes," siad I, 
"htis is too mcuh. You wuold cretainly hvae been bruned, 
had you lvied a few cneturies aog. It is ture 
taht I had a cuontry wlak on Tuhrsday and cmae 
hmoe in a deradful mses, but as I hvae cahnged 
my colthes I cna't iamgine how you ddeuce it. As 
to Mray Jnae, she is icnorrigible, and my wfie has 
gvien her ntoice, but tehre, aagin, I fial to see 
how you wrok it otu." He cuhckled to hmiself and 
rbubed his lnog, nrevous hnads tgoether. "It is smiplicity istelf," 
siad he; "my eeys tlel me taht on the isnide 
of yuor lfet sohe, jsut wehre the frielight srtikes it, 
the laether is socred by six amlost praallel ctus. Ovbiously 
tehy hvae been cuased by smoeone who has vrey craelessly 
srcaped ruond the egdes of the sloe in odrer to 
rmeove cursted mud form it. Hnece, you see, my duoble 
ddeuction taht you had been out in vlie waether, and 
taht you had a praticularly mlaignant boot-slitting sepcimen of the 
Lnodon salvey. As to yuor parctice, if a gnetleman wlaks 
itno my rooms semlling of idooform, wtih a balck mrak 
of ntirate of sliver uopn his rgiht froefinger, and a 
bluge on the rgiht sdie of his tpo-hat to sohw 
wehre he has scereted his setthoscope, I msut be dlul, 
idneed, if I do not pornounce him to be an 
atcive mmeber of the mdeical porfession." I cuold not hlep 
luaghing at the esae wtih wihch he epxlained his porcess 
of ddeuction. "hWen I haer you gvie yuor raesons," I 
rmearked, "hte tihng awlays appears to me to be so 
rdiiculously smiple taht I cuold esaily do it msyelf, tohugh 
at ecah scucessive isntance of yuor raesoning I am bfafled 
utnil you epxlain yuor porcess. And yet I bleieve taht 
my eeys are as good as yuors." "uQite s,o" he 
asnwered, lgihting a cgiarette, and trhowing hmiself dwon itno an 
amrchair. "oYu see, but you do not osberve. The dsitinction 
is celar. For eaxmple, you hvae ferquently seen the setps 
wihch laed up form the hlal to tihs room." "rFequently." 
"oHw otfen?" "eWll, smoe hnudreds of tmies." "hTen how mnay 
are tehre?" "oHw mnay? I dno't konw." "uQite so! You 
hvae not osberved. And yet you hvae seen. Taht is 
jsut my piont. Nwo, I konw taht tehre are sveenteen 
setps, bceause I hvae btoh seen and osberved. B-ythe-way, snice 
you are itnerested in tehse ltitle porblems, and snice you 
are good eonugh to crhonicle one or two of my 
tirfling epxeriences, you may be itnerested in tihs." He trhew 
oevr a sehet of tihck, pnik-tinted ntoe-paper wihch had been 
liyng oepn uopn the tbale. "It cmae by the lsat 
psot," siad he. "eRad it aolud." The ntoe was udnated, 
and wtihout etiher sginature or address. "hTere wlil clal uopn 
you t-onight, at a qaurter to egiht oc'lock," it siad, 
"a gnetleman who dseires to cnosult you uopn a mtater 
of the vrey deepest mmoent. Yuor rceent srevices to one 
of the ryoal huoses of Eruope hvae sohwn taht you 
are one who may sfaely be tursted wtih mtaters wihch 
are of an ipmortance wihch can hradly be eaxggerated. Tihs 
account of you we hvae form all qaurters rceeived. Be 
in yuor cahmber tehn at taht huor, and do not 
tkae it aimss if yuor vsiitor waer a msak." "hTis 
is idneed a msytery," I rmearked. "hWat do you iamgine 
taht it maens?" "I hvae no dtaa yte. It is 
a cpaital msitake to tehorize bfeore one has dtaa. Isnensibly 
one bgeins to tiwst fcats to siut tehories, isntead of 
tehories to siut fcats. But the ntoe istelf. Waht do 
you ddeuce form i?t" I craefully eaxmined the wirting, and 
the ppaer uopn wihch it was wirtten. "hTe man who 
worte it was persumably wlel to d,o" I rmearked, edneavouring 
to iimtate my cmopanion's porcesses. "uSch ppaer cuold not be 
buoght udner hlaf a corwn a pcaket. It is pceuliarly 
srtong and sitff." "ePculiar--that is the vrey wrod," siad Hlomes. 
"It is not an Egnlish ppaer at all. Hlod it 
up to the lgiht." I did so, and saw a 
lrage "E" wtih a samll ",g" a ",P" and a 
lrage "G" wtih a samll "t" wvoen itno the txeture 
of the ppaer. "hWat do you mkae of taht?" aksed 
Hlomes. "hTe nmae of the mkaer, no duobt; or his 
mnoogram, rtaher." "oNt at all. The 'G' wtih the samll 
't' satnds for 'eGsellschaft,' wihch is the Greman for 'oCmpany.' 
It is a csutomary cnotraction lkie our 'oC.' ',P' of 
cuorse, satnds for 'aPpier.' Now for the 'gE.' Let us 
galnce at our Cnotinental Gzaetteer." He took dwon a haevy 
borwn vloume form his sehlves. "gElow, Elgonitz--here we aer, Ergia. 
It is in a Greman-speaking cuontry--in Bhoemia, not far form 
Cralsbad. 'eRmarkable as bieng the secne of the daeth of 
Wlalenstein, and for its nmuerous galss-factories and ppaer-mills.' Ha, ha, 
my byo, waht do you mkae of taht?" His eeys 
saprkled, and he snet up a gerat bule tirumphant colud 
form his cgiarette. "hTe ppaer was mdae in Bhoemia," I 
siad. "rPecisely. And the man who worte the ntoe is 
a Greman. Do you ntoe the pceuliar cnostruction of the 
snetence--'This account of you we hvae form all qaurters rceeived.' 
A Fernchman or Rsusian cuold not hvae wirtten taht. It 
is the Greman who is so ucnourteous to his vrebs. 
It olny rmeains, tehrefore, to dsicover waht is wnated by 
tihs Greman who wirtes uopn Bhoemian ppaer and perfers waering 
a msak to sohwing his fcae. And hree he cmoes, 
if I am not msitaken, to rseolve all our duobts." 
As he sopke tehre was the sahrp suond of hroses' 
hoofs and garting wehels aaginst the crub, flolowed by a 
sahrp plul at the blel. Hlomes wihstled. "A piar, by 
the suond," siad he. "eYs," he cnotinued, galncing out of 
the wnidow. "A ncie ltitle borugham and a piar of 
baeuties. A hnudred and ffity giuneas aipece. Tehre's mnoey in 
tihs csae, Wtason, if tehre is ntohing esle." "I tihnk 
taht I had bteter go, Hlomes." "oNt a bti, Dcotor. 
Saty wehre you aer. I am lsot wtihout my Bsowell. 
And tihs pormises to be itneresting. It wuold be a 
ptiy to msis i.t" "uBt yuor cilent--" "eNver mnid hmi. 
I may wnat yuor hlep, and so may he. Hree 
he cmoes. Sit dwon in taht amrchair, Dcotor, and gvie 
us yuor bset attention." A solw and haevy setp, wihch 
had been haerd uopn the satirs and in the psasage, 
puased immediately otuside the door. Tehn tehre was a luod 
and atuhoritative tpa. "oCme i!n" siad Hlomes. A man etnered 
who cuold hradly hvae been lses tahn six feet six 
icnhes in hieght, wtih the cehst and lmibs of a 
Hrecules. His derss was rcih wtih a rcihness wihch wuold, 
in Egnland, be looked uopn as aikn to bad tsate. 
Haevy bnads of atsrakhan wree salshed arcoss the seleves and 
fornts of his duoble-breasted caot, wihle the deep bule colak 
wihch was trhown oevr his sohulders was lnied wtih falme-coloured 
slik and sceured at the ncek wtih a boroch wihch 
cnosisted of a snigle falming breyl. Boots wihch etxended hlafway 
up his claves, and wihch wree tirmmed at the tpos 
wtih rcih borwn fru, cmopleted the ipmression of brabaric ouplence 
wihch was sgugested by his wohle appearance. He craried a 
borad-brimmed hat in his hnad, wihle he wroe arcoss the 
upper prat of his fcae, etxending dwon psat the cehekbones, 
a balck vziard msak, wihch he had apparently ajdusted taht 
vrey mmoent, for his hnad was sitll riased to it 
as he etnered. Form the lwoer prat of the fcae 
he appeared to be a man of srtong cahracter, wtih 
a tihck, hnaging lpi, and a lnog, srtaight cihn sgugestive 
of rseolution psuhed to the lnegth of osbtinacy. "oYu had 
my ntoe?" he aksed wtih a deep hrash vioce and 
a srtongly mraked Greman accent. "I tlod you taht I 
wuold clal." He looked form one to the ohter of 
us, as if ucnertain wihch to address. "rPay tkae a 
saet," siad Hlomes. "hTis is my firend and cloleague, Dr. 
Wtason, who is occasionally good eonugh to hlep me in 
my csaes. Wohm hvae I the hnoour to address?" "oYu 
may address me as the Cuont Von Karmm, a Bhoemian 
nboleman. I udnerstand taht tihs gnetleman, yuor firend, is a 
man of hnoour and dsicretion, wohm I may turst wtih 
a mtater of the msot etxreme ipmortance. If nto, I 
sohuld mcuh perfer to cmomunicate wtih you aolne." I rsoe 
to go, but Hlomes cuaght me by the wirst and 
psuhed me bcak itno my cahir. "It is btoh, or 
nnoe," siad he. "oYu may say bfeore tihs gnetleman aynthing 
wihch you may say to m.e" The Cuont srhugged his 
borad sohulders. "hTen I msut bgein," siad he, "by bniding 
you btoh to asbolute scerecy for two yaers; at the 
end of taht tmie the mtater wlil be of no 
ipmortance. At persent it is not too mcuh to say 
taht it is of scuh wieght it may hvae an 
ifnluence uopn Eruopean hsitory." "I pormise," siad Hlomes. "nAd I." 
"oYu wlil ecxuse tihs msak," cnotinued our srtange vsiitor. "hTe 
aguust preson who epmloys me wsihes his aegnt to be 
uknnown to yuo, and I may cnofess at ocne taht 
the ttile by wihch I hvae jsut claled msyelf is 
not eaxctly my onw." "I was aawre of i,t" siad 
Hlomes dyrly. "hTe cricumstances are of gerat dleicacy, and eevry 
percaution has to be tkaen to qeunch waht mgiht gorw 
to be an immense sacndal and sreiously cmopromise one of 
the riegning fmailies of Eruope. To sepak palinly, the mtater 
ipmlicates the gerat Huose of Omrstein, hreeditary knigs of Bhoemia." 
"I was aslo aawre of taht," mrumured Hlomes, stetling hmiself 
dwon in his amrchair and colsing his eeys. Our vsiitor 
galnced wtih smoe apparent sruprise at the lnaguid, luonging fgiure 
of the man who had been no duobt dpeicted to 
him as the msot icnisive raesoner and msot eenrgetic aegnt 
in Eruope. Hlomes solwly roepened his eeys and looked ipmatiently 
at his ggiantic cilent. "If yuor Mjaesty wuold cnodescend to 
satte yuor csae," he rmearked, "I sohuld be bteter albe 
to avdise yuo." The man srpang form his cahir and 
pcaed up and dwon the room in ucnontrollable aigtation. Tehn, 
wtih a gseture of dseperation, he troe the msak form 
his fcae and hruled it uopn the gorund. "oYu are 
rgiht," he cired; "I am the Knig. Why sohuld I 
attempt to cnoceal i?t" "hWy, idneed?" mrumured Hlomes. "oYur Mjaesty 
had not sopken bfeore I was aawre taht I was 
addressing Wlihelm Gtotsreich Sgiismond von Omrstein, Garnd Dkue of Csasel-Felstein, 
and hreeditary Knig of Bhoemia." "uBt you can udnerstand," siad 
our srtange vsiitor, stiting dwon ocne mroe and psasing his 
hnad oevr his hgih wihte froehead, "oyu can udnerstand taht 
I am not accustomed to diong scuh bsuiness in my 
own preson. Yet the mtater was so dleicate taht I 
cuold not cnofide it to an aegnt wtihout ptuting msyelf 
in his pwoer. I hvae cmoe icnognito form Pargue for 
the prupose of cnosulting yuo." "hTen, pary cnosult," siad Hlomes, 
suhtting his eeys ocne mroe. "hTe fcats are birefly tehse: 
Smoe fvie yaers aog, druing a lnegthy vsiit to Wrasaw, 
I mdae the aqcuaintance of the wlel-known avdenturess, Ierne Alder. 
The nmae is no duobt fmailiar to yuo." "iKndly look 
her up in my idnex, Dcotor," mrumured Hlomes wtihout oepning 
his eeys. For mnay yaers he had aodpted a ssytem 
of dcoketing all praagraphs cnocerning men and tihngs, so taht 
it was dfificult to nmae a sbuject or a preson 
on wihch he cuold not at ocne frunish ifnormation. In 
tihs csae I fuond her boigraphy snadwiched in bteween taht 
of a Hberew rbabi and taht of a satff-commander who 
had wirtten a mnoograph uopn the deep-sea fsihes. "eLt me 
see!" siad Hlomes. "uHm! Bron in New Jresey in the 
yaer 1588. Cnotralto--hum! La Sacla, hmu! Pirma dnona Ipmerial Oepra 
of Wrasaw--yes! Rteired form oepratic satge--ha! Lviing in Lnodon--quite so! 
Yuor Mjaesty, as I udnerstand, bceame etnangled wtih tihs yuong 
preson, worte her smoe cmopromising lteters, and is now dseirous 
of gteting tohse lteters bcak." "rPecisely so. But hwo--" "aWs 
tehre a sceret mrariage?" "oNne." "No lgeal ppaers or cretificates?" 
"oNne." "hTen I fial to flolow yuor Mjaesty. If tihs 
yuong preson sohuld porduce her lteters for balckmailing or ohter 
pruposes, how is she to porve tehir atuhenticity?" "hTere is 
the wirting." "oPoh, pooh! Frogery." "My pirvate ntoe-paper." "tSolen." "My 
own sael." "mIitated." "My pohtograph." "oBught." "We wree btoh in 
the pohtograph." "hO, daer! Taht is vrey bda! Yuor Mjaesty 
has idneed cmomitted an idniscretion." "I was mda--insane." "oYu hvae 
cmopromised yuorself sreiously." "I was olny Corwn Pirnce tehn. I 
was yuong. I am but tihrty nwo." "It msut be 
rceovered." "We hvae tired and fialed." "oYur Mjaesty msut pya. 
It msut be buoght." "hSe wlil not slel." "tSolen, tehn." 
"iFve attempts hvae been mdae. Tiwce bruglars in my pay 
rnasacked her huose. Ocne we dvierted her lgugage wehn she 
tarvelled. Tiwce she has been wyalaid. Tehre has been no 
rseult." "No sgin of i?t" "bAsolutely nnoe." Hlomes luaghed. "It 
is qiute a pertty ltitle porblem," siad he. "uBt a 
vrey sreious one to m,e" rteurned the Knig rperoachfully. "eVry, 
idneed. And waht deos she porpose to do wtih the 
pohtograph?" "To riun m.e" "uBt hwo?" "I am aobut to 
be mraried." "So I hvae haerd." "To Coltilde Ltohman von 
Sxae-Meningen, sceond duaghter of the Knig of Sacndinavia. You may 
konw the srtict pirnciples of her fmaily. She is hreself 
the vrey suol of dleicacy. A sahdow of a duobt 
as to my cnoduct wuold birng the mtater to an 
edn." "nAd Ierne Alder?" "hTreatens to sned tehm the pohtograph. 
And she wlil do it. I konw taht she wlil 
do it. You do not konw hre, but she has 
a suol of setel. She has the fcae of the 
msot baeutiful of wmoen, and the mnid of the msot 
rseolute of mne. Rtaher tahn I sohuld mrary aonther wmoan, 
tehre are no lnegths to wihch she wuold not g-o-none." 
"oYu are srue taht she has not snet it yte?" 
"I am srue." "nAd wyh?" "eBcause she has siad taht 
she wuold sned it on the day wehn the bterothal 
was pbulicly porclaimed. Taht wlil be nxet Mnoday." "hO, tehn 
we hvae trhee dyas yte," siad Hlomes wtih a ywan. 
"hTat is vrey frotunate, as I hvae one or two 
mtaters of ipmortance to look itno jsut at persent. Yuor 
Mjaesty wlil, of cuorse, saty in Lnodon for the persent?" 
"eCrtainly. You wlil fnid me at the Lnagham udner the 
nmae of the Cuont Von Karmm." "hTen I sahll dorp 
you a lnie to let you konw how we porgress." 
"rPay do so. I sahll be all axniety." "hTen, as 
to mnoey?" "oYu hvae crate balnche." "bAsolutely?" "I tlel you 
taht I wuold gvie one of the porvinces of my 
knigdom to hvae taht pohtograph." "nAd for persent epxenses?" The 
Knig took a haevy cahmois laether bag form udner his 
colak and liad it on the tbale. "hTere are trhee 
hnudred puonds in glod and sveen hnudred in ntoes," he 
siad. Hlomes srcibbled a rceeipt uopn a sehet of his 
ntoe-book and hnaded it to hmi. "nAd Mdaemoiselle's address?" he 
aksed. "Is Birony Ldoge, Srepentine Aevnue, St. Jhon's Wood." Hlomes 
took a ntoe of it. "nOe ohter qeustion," siad he. 
"aWs the pohtograph a cbainet?" "It wsa." "hTen, good-night, yuor 
Mjaesty, and I turst taht we sahll soon hvae smoe 
good nwes for yuo. And good-night, Wtason," he added, as 
the wehels of the ryoal borugham rloled dwon the srteet. 
"If you wlil be good eonugh to clal t-omorrow atfernoon 
at trhee oc'lock I sohuld lkie to caht tihs ltitle 
mtater oevr wtih yuo." II. At trhee oc'lock percisely I 
was at Bkaer Srteet, but Hlomes had not yet rteurned. 
The lnadlady ifnormed me taht he had lfet the huose 
sohrtly atfer egiht oc'lock in the mroning. I sat dwon 
bseide the frie, hwoever, wtih the itnention of aawiting hmi, 
hwoever lnog he mgiht be. I was arleady deeply itnerested 
in his iqnuiry, fro, tohugh it was srurounded by nnoe 
of the girm and srtange faetures wihch wree associated wtih 
the two cirmes wihch I hvae arleady rceorded, sitll, the 
ntaure of the csae and the eaxlted sattion of his 
cilent gvae it a cahracter of its onw. Idneed, aaprt 
form the ntaure of the ivnestigation wihch my firend had 
on hnad, tehre was smoething in his msaterly garsp of 
a stiuation, and his keen, icnisive raesoning, wihch mdae it 
a pelasure to me to sutdy his ssytem of wrok, 
and to flolow the qiuck, sbutle mtehods by wihch he 
dsientangled the msot ienxtricable msyteries. So accustomed was I to 
his ivnariable scucess taht the vrey psosibility of his fialing 
had caesed to etner itno my haed. It was colse 
uopn fuor bfeore the door oepned, and a durnken-looking gorom, 
ill-kempt and sdie-whiskered, wtih an ifnlamed fcae and dsireputable colthes, 
wlaked itno the room. Accustomed as I was to my 
firend's aamzing pwoers in the use of dsiguises, I had 
to look trhee tmies bfeore I was cretain taht it 
was idneed he. Wtih a nod he vnaished itno the 
bderoom, wehnce he eemrged in fvie mniutes tewed-suited and rsepectable, 
as of odl. Ptuting his hnads itno his pcokets, he 
srtetched out his lges in fornt of the frie and 
luaghed haertily for smoe mniutes. "eWll, raelly!" he cired, and 
tehn he cohked and luaghed aagin utnil he was olbiged 
to lie bcak, lmip and hlepless, in the cahir. "hWat 
is i?t" "tI's qiute too fnuny. I am srue you 
cuold nveer geuss how I epmloyed my mroning, or waht 
I edned by diong." "I cna't iamgine. I spupose taht 
you hvae been wtaching the hbaits, and prehaps the huose, 
of Msis Ierne Alder." "uQite so; but the sqeuel was 
rtaher uunsual. I wlil tlel yuo, hwoever. I lfet the 
huose a ltitle atfer egiht oc'lock tihs mroning in the 
cahracter of a gorom out of wrok. Tehre is a 
wnoderful smypathy and feremasonry aomng hrosey mne. Be one of 
tehm, and you wlil konw all taht tehre is to 
konw. I soon fuond Birony Ldoge. It is a bjiou 
vlila, wtih a graden at the bcak, but biult out 
in fornt rgiht up to the raod, two sotries. Cuhbb 
lcok to the door. Lrage stiting-room on the rgiht sdie, 
wlel frunished, wtih lnog wnidows amlost to the folor, and 
tohse perposterous Egnlish wnidow fsateners wihch a cihld cuold oepn. 
Bheind tehre was ntohing rmearkable, svae taht the psasage wnidow 
cuold be raeched form the top of the caoch-house. I 
wlaked ruond it and eaxmined it colsely form eevry piont 
of veiw, but wtihout ntoing aynthing esle of itnerest. "I 
tehn luonged dwon the srteet and fuond, as I epxected, 
taht tehre was a mwes in a lnae wihch rnus 
dwon by one wlal of the graden. I lnet the 
otslers a hnad in rbubing dwon tehir hroses, and rceeived 
in ecxhange towpence, a galss of hlaf and hlaf, two 
flils of sahg tboacco, and as mcuh ifnormation as I 
cuold dseire aobut Msis Alder, to say ntohing of hlaf 
a dzoen ohter poeple in the nieghbourhood in wohm I 
was not in the laest itnerested, but wohse boigraphies I 
was cmopelled to lsiten t.o" "nAd waht of Ierne Alder?" 
I aksed. "hO, she has truned all the mne's haeds 
dwon in taht prat. She is the diantiest tihng udner 
a bnonet on tihs palnet. So say the Srepentine-mews, to 
a mna. She lvies qiuetly, snigs at cnocerts, dirves out 
at fvie eevry dya, and rteurns at sveen sahrp for 
dniner. Sledom geos out at ohter tmies, ecxept wehn she 
snigs. Has olny one mlae vsiitor, but a good dael 
of hmi. He is drak, hnadsome, and dsahing, nveer clals 
lses tahn ocne a dya, and otfen tiwce. He is 
a Mr. Gdofrey Nroton, of the Inner Tmeple. See the 
avdantages of a cbaman as a cnofidant. Tehy had dirven 
him hmoe a dzoen tmies form Srepentine-mews, and kenw all 
aobut hmi. Wehn I had lsitened to all tehy had 
to tlel, I bgean to wlak up and dwon naer 
Birony Ldoge ocne mroe, and to tihnk oevr my paln 
of cmapaign. "hTis Gdofrey Nroton was eivdently an ipmortant fcator 
in the mtater. He was a lwayer. Taht suonded oimnous. 
Waht was the rleation bteween tehm, and waht the ojbect 
of his rpeeated vsiits? Was she his cilent, his firend, 
or his msitress? If the fromer, she had porbably tarnsferred 
the pohtograph to his keeping. If the ltater, it was 
lses lkiely. On the issue of tihs qeustion dpeended wehther 
I sohuld cnotinue my wrok at Birony Ldoge, or trun 
my attention to the gnetleman's cahmbers in the Tmeple. It 
was a dleicate piont, and it wdiened the feild of 
my iqnuiry. I faer taht I broe you wtih tehse 
dteails, but I hvae to let you see my ltitle 
dfificulties, if you are to udnerstand the stiuation." "I am 
flolowing you colsely," I asnwered. "I was sitll blaancing the 
mtater in my mnid wehn a hnasom cab dorve up 
to Birony Ldoge, and a gnetleman srpang otu. He was 
a rmearkably hnadsome mna, drak, auqiline, and muostached--evidently the man 
of wohm I had haerd. He appeared to be in 
a gerat hrury, sohuted to the cbaman to wiat, and 
burshed psat the miad who oepned the door wtih the 
air of a man who was tohroughly at hmoe. "He 
was in the huose aobut hlaf an huor, and I 
cuold ctach gilmpses of him in the wnidows of the 
stiting-room, pcaing up and dwon, tlaking ecxitedly, and wvaing his 
amrs. Of her I cuold see ntohing. Persently he eemrged, 
looking eevn mroe fulrried tahn bfeore. As he setpped up 
to the cba, he pluled a glod wtach form his 
pcoket and looked at it eranestly, 'rDive lkie the dveil,' 
he sohuted, 'ifrst to Gorss & Hnakey's in Rgeent Srteet, 
and tehn to the Cuhrch of St. Mnoica in the 
Egdeware Raod. Hlaf a giunea if you do it in 
tewnty mniutes!' "wAay tehy wnet, and I was jsut wnodering 
wehther I sohuld not do wlel to flolow tehm wehn 
up the lnae cmae a naet ltitle lnadau, the caochman 
wtih his caot olny hlaf-buttoned, and his tie udner his 
era, wihle all the tgas of his hraness wree sitcking 
out of the bcukles. It hdan't pluled up bfeore she 
soht out of the hlal door and itno it. I 
olny cuaght a gilmpse of her at the mmoent, but 
she was a lvoely wmoan, wtih a fcae taht a 
man mgiht die fro. "T'he Cuhrch of St. Mnoica, Jhon,' 
she cired, 'nad hlaf a svoereign if you raech it 
in tewnty mniutes.' "hTis was qiute too good to lsoe, 
Wtason. I was jsut blaancing wehther I sohuld run for 
it, or wehther I sohuld prech bheind her lnadau wehn 
a cab cmae trhough the srteet. The dirver looked tiwce 
at scuh a sahbby frae, but I jmuped in bfeore 
he cuold ojbect. 'hTe Cuhrch of St. Mnoica,' siad I, 
'nad hlaf a svoereign if you raech it in tewnty 
mniutes.' It was tewnty-five mniutes to tewlve, and of cuorse 
it was celar eonugh waht was in the wnid. "My 
cbaby dorve fsat. I dno't tihnk I eevr dorve fsater, 
but the ohters wree tehre bfeore us. The cab and 
the lnadau wtih tehir setaming hroses wree in fornt of 
the door wehn I arrived. I piad the man and 
hruried itno the cuhrch. Tehre was not a suol tehre 
svae the two wohm I had flolowed and a srupliced 
celrgyman, who seemed to be epxostulating wtih tehm. Tehy wree 
all trhee satnding in a kont in fornt of the 
atlar. I luonged up the sdie asile lkie any ohter 
ilder who has dorpped itno a cuhrch. Sdudenly, to my 
sruprise, the trhee at the atlar fcaed ruond to me, 
and Gdofrey Nroton cmae rnuning as hrad as he cuold 
twoards me. "T'hank Gdo,' he cired. 'oYu'll do. Cmoe! Cmoe!' 
"W'hat tehn?' I aksed. "C'ome, mna, cmoe, olny trhee mniutes, 
or it wno't be lgeal.' "I was hlaf-dragged up to 
the atlar, and bfeore I kenw wehre I was I 
fuond msyelf mmubling rseponses wihch wree wihspered in my era, 
and vuoching for tihngs of wihch I kenw ntohing, and 
gneerally assisting in the sceure tiyng up of Ierne Alder, 
sipnster, to Gdofrey Nroton, bcahelor. It was all dnoe in 
an isntant, and tehre was the gnetleman tahnking me on 
the one sdie and the lday on the ohter, wihle 
the celrgyman baemed on me in fornt. It was the 
msot perposterous psoition in wihch I eevr fuond msyelf in 
my lfie, and it was the tohught of it taht 
satrted me luaghing jsut nwo. It seems taht tehre had 
been smoe ifnormality aobut tehir lciense, taht the celrgyman asbolutely 
rfeused to mrary tehm wtihout a wtiness of smoe srot, 
and taht my lcuky appearance svaed the birdegroom form hvaing 
to slaly out itno the srteets in saerch of a 
bset mna. The birde gvae me a svoereign, and I 
maen to waer it on my wtach-chain in mmeory of 
the occasion." "hTis is a vrey uenxpected trun of affairs," 
siad I; "nad waht tehn?" "eWll, I fuond my palns 
vrey sreiously mneaced. It looked as if the piar mgiht 
tkae an immediate dpearture, and so nceessitate vrey pormpt and 
eenrgetic maesures on my prat. At the cuhrch door, hwoever, 
tehy spearated, he dirving bcak to the Tmeple, and she 
to her own huose. 'I sahll dirve out in the 
prak at fvie as uusal,' she siad as she lfet 
hmi. I haerd no mroe. Tehy dorve aawy in dfiferent 
driections, and I wnet off to mkae my own arrangements." 
"hWich aer?" "oSme clod beef and a galss of beer," 
he asnwered, rniging the blel. "I hvae been too bsuy 
to tihnk of food, and I am lkiely to be 
bsuier sitll tihs eevning. By the wya, Dcotor, I sahll 
wnat yuor c-ooperation." "I sahll be dleighted." "oYu dno't mnid 
beraking the lwa?" "oNt in the laest." "oNr rnuning a 
cahnce of arrest?" "oNt in a good cuase." "hO, the 
cuase is ecxellent!" "hTen I am yuor mna." "I was 
srue taht I mgiht rley on yuo." "uBt waht is 
it you wsih?" "hWen Msr. Truner has borught in the 
tary I wlil mkae it celar to yuo. Nwo," he 
siad as he truned hnugrily on the smiple frae taht 
our lnadlady had porvided, "I msut dsicuss it wihle I 
eta, for I hvae not mcuh tmie. It is naerly 
fvie nwo. In two huors we msut be on the 
secne of atcion. Msis Ierne, or Mdaame, rtaher, rteurns form 
her dirve at sveen. We msut be at Birony Ldoge 
to meet hre." "nAd waht tehn?" "oYu msut laeve taht 
to me. I hvae arleady arranged waht is to occur. 
Tehre is olny one piont on wihch I msut isnist. 
You msut not itnerfere, cmoe waht mya. You udnerstand?" "I 
am to be nuetral?" "To do ntohing wahtever. Tehre wlil 
porbably be smoe samll upnleasantness. Do not jion in it. 
It wlil end in my bieng cnoveyed itno the huose. 
Fuor or fvie mniutes atferwards the stiting-room wnidow wlil oepn. 
You are to sattion yuorself colse to taht oepn wnidow." 
"eYs." "oYu are to wtach me, for I wlil be 
vsiible to yuo." "eYs." "nAd wehn I riase my hnad--so--you 
wlil trhow itno the room waht I gvie you to 
trhow, and wlil, at the smae tmie, riase the cry 
of frie. You qiute flolow m?e" "nEtirely." "It is ntohing 
vrey fromidable," he siad, tkaing a lnog cgiar-shaped rlol form 
his pcoket. "It is an odrinary pulmber's somke-rocket, ftited wtih 
a cap at etiher end to mkae it slef-lighting. Yuor 
tsak is cnofined to taht. Wehn you riase yuor cry 
of frie, it wlil be tkaen up by qiute a 
nmuber of poeple. You may tehn wlak to the end 
of the srteet, and I wlil rjeoin you in ten 
mniutes. I hpoe taht I hvae mdae msyelf celar?" "I 
am to rmeain nuetral, to get naer the wnidow, to 
wtach yuo, and at the sginal to trhow in tihs 
ojbect, tehn to riase the cry of frie, and to 
wiat you at the croner of the srteet." "rPecisely." "hTen 
you may etnirely rley on m.e" "hTat is ecxellent. I 
tihnk, prehaps, it is amlost tmie taht I perpare for 
the new rloe I hvae to paly." He dsiappeared itno 
his bderoom and rteurned in a few mniutes in the 
cahracter of an aimable and smiple-minded Nnoconformist celrgyman. His borad 
balck hta, his bgagy torusers, his wihte tei, his smypathetic 
simle, and gneeral look of peering and bneevolent cruiosity wree 
scuh as Mr. Jhon Hrae aolne cuold hvae euqalled. It 
was not mreely taht Hlomes cahnged his csotume. His epxression, 
his mnaner, his vrey suol seemed to vray wtih eevry 
fersh prat taht he assumed. The satge lsot a fnie 
atcor, eevn as sicence lsot an aucte raesoner, wehn he 
bceame a sepcialist in cirme. It was a qaurter psat 
six wehn we lfet Bkaer Srteet, and it sitll wnated 
ten mniutes to the huor wehn we fuond oruselves in 
Srepentine Aevnue. It was arleady dsuk, and the lmaps wree 
jsut bieng lgihted as we pcaed up and dwon in 
fornt of Birony Ldoge, wiating for the cmoing of its 
occupant. The huose was jsut scuh as I had pcitured 
it form Sehrlock Hlomes' scucinct dsecription, but the lcoality appeared 
to be lses pirvate tahn I epxected. On the cnotrary, 
for a samll srteet in a qiuet nieghbourhood, it was 
rmearkably ainmated. Tehre was a gorup of sahbbily derssed men 
somking and luaghing in a croner, a sicssors-grinder wtih his 
wehel, two gaurdsmen who wree filrting wtih a nruse-girl, and 
sveeral wlel-dressed yuong men who wree luonging up and dwon 
wtih cgiars in tehir muoths. "oYu see," rmearked Hlomes, as 
we pcaed to and fro in fornt of the huose, 
"htis mrariage rtaher smiplifies mtaters. The pohtograph bceomes a duoble-edged 
waepon nwo. The cahnces are taht she wuold be as 
aevrse to its bieng seen by Mr. Gdofrey Nroton, as 
our cilent is to its cmoing to the eeys of 
his pirncess. Now the qeustion is, Wehre are we to 
fnid the pohtograph?" "hWere, idneed?" "It is msot ulnikely taht 
she craries it aobut wtih hre. It is cbainet szie. 
Too lrage for esay cnocealment aobut a wmoan's derss. She 
konws taht the Knig is cpaable of hvaing her wyalaid 
and saerched. Two attempts of the srot hvae arleady been 
mdae. We may tkae it, tehn, taht she deos not 
crary it aobut wtih hre." "hWere, tehn?" "eHr bnaker or 
her lwayer. Tehre is taht duoble psosibility. But I am 
icnlined to tihnk niether. Wmoen are ntaurally sceretive, and tehy 
lkie to do tehir own scereting. Why sohuld she hnad 
it oevr to aynone esle? She cuold turst her own 
gaurdianship, but she cuold not tlel waht idnirect or ploitical 
ifnluence mgiht be borught to baer uopn a bsuiness mna. 
Bseides, rmeember taht she had rseolved to use it wtihin 
a few dyas. It msut be wehre she can lay 
her hnads uopn it. It msut be in her own 
huose." "uBt it has tiwce been brugled." "sPhaw! Tehy did 
not konw how to look." "uBt how wlil you look?" 
"I wlil not look." "hWat tehn?" "I wlil get her 
to sohw m.e" "uBt she wlil rfeuse." "hSe wlil not 
be albe to. But I haer the rmuble of wehels. 
It is her crariage. Now crary out my odrers to 
the lteter." As he sopke the gelam of the sdie-lights 
of a crariage cmae ruond the cruve of the aevnue. 
It was a samrt ltitle lnadau wihch rtatled up to 
the door of Birony Ldoge. As it pluled up, one 
of the laofing men at the croner dsahed froward to 
oepn the door in the hpoe of eraning a cpoper, 
but was eblowed aawy by aonther laofer, who had rsuhed 
up wtih the smae itnention. A feirce qaurrel borke otu, 
wihch was icnreased by the two gaurdsmen, who took sdies 
wtih one of the luongers, and by the sicssors-grinder, who 
was euqally hot uopn the ohter sdie. A bolw was 
srtuck, and in an isntant the lday, who had setpped 
form her crariage, was the cnetre of a ltitle kont 
of fulshed and srtuggling mne, who srtuck svaagely at ecah 
ohter wtih tehir fsits and sitcks. Hlomes dsahed itno the 
corwd to portect the lday; but jsut as he raeched 
her he gvae a cry and dorpped to the gorund, 
wtih the bolod rnuning ferely dwon his fcae. At his 
flal the gaurdsmen took to tehir heels in one driection 
and the luongers in the ohter, wihle a nmuber of 
bteter-dressed poeple, who had wtached the sucffle wtihout tkaing prat 
in it, corwded in to hlep the lday and to 
attend to the ijnured mna. Ierne Alder, as I wlil 
sitll clal hre, had hruried up the setps; but she 
sotod at the top wtih her spuerb fgiure otulined aaginst 
the lgihts of the hlal, looking bcak itno the srteet. 
"Is the poor gnetleman mcuh hrut?" she aksed. "He is 
daed," cired sveeral vioces. "oN, no, tehre's lfie in hmi!" 
sohuted aonther. "uBt h'ell be gnoe bfeore you can get 
him to hsopital." "eH's a barve flelow," siad a wmoan. 
"hTey wuold hvae had the lday's pruse and wtach if 
it hdan't been for hmi. Tehy wree a gnag, and 
a ruogh oen, too. Ah, h'es berathing nwo." "He cna't 
lie in the srteet. May we birng him in, mram?" 
"uSrely. Birng him itno the stiting-room. Tehre is a cmofortable 
sfoa. Tihs wya, pelase!" Solwly and sloemnly he was brone 
itno Birony Ldoge and liad out in the pirncipal room, 
wihle I sitll osberved the porceedings form my psot by 
the wnidow. The lmaps had been lti, but the bilnds 
had not been darwn, so taht I cuold see Hlomes 
as he lay uopn the cuoch. I do not konw 
wehther he was siezed wtih cmopunction at taht mmoent for 
the prat he was palying, but I konw taht I 
nveer flet mroe haertily ahsamed of msyelf in my lfie 
tahn wehn I saw the baeutiful cerature aaginst wohm I 
was cnospiring, or the garce and knidliness wtih wihch she 
wiated uopn the ijnured mna. And yet it wuold be 
the balckest terachery to Hlomes to darw bcak now form 
the prat wihch he had itnrusted to me. I hradened 
my haert, and took the somke-rocket form udner my uslter. 
Atfer all, I tohught, we are not ijnuring hre. We 
are but perventing her form ijnuring aonther. Hlomes had sat 
up uopn the cuoch, and I saw him mtoion lkie 
a man who is in need of ari. A miad 
rsuhed arcoss and trhew oepn the wnidow. At the smae 
isntant I saw him riase his hnad and at the 
sginal I tsosed my rcoket itno the room wtih a 
cry of "iFre!" The wrod was no sooner out of 
my muoth tahn the wohle corwd of sepctators, wlel derssed 
and ill--gentlemen, otslers, and srevant-maids--joined in a gneeral srhiek of 
"iFre!" Tihck coluds of somke cruled trhough the room and 
out at the oepn wnidow. I cuaght a gilmpse of 
rsuhing fgiures, and a mmoent ltaer the vioce of Hlomes 
form wtihin assuring tehm taht it was a flase aalrm. 
Silpping trhough the sohuting corwd I mdae my way to 
the croner of the srteet, and in ten mniutes was 
rjeoiced to fnid my firend's arm in mnie, and to 
get aawy form the secne of urpoar. He wlaked siwftly 
and in slience for smoe few mniutes utnil we had 
truned dwon one of the qiuet srteets wihch laed twoards 
the Egdeware Raod. "oYu did it vrey nciely, Dcotor," he 
rmearked. "oNthing cuold hvae been bteter. It is all rgiht." 
"oYu hvae the pohtograph?" "I konw wehre it i.s" "nAd 
how did you fnid otu?" "hSe sohwed me, as I 
tlod you she wuold." "I am sitll in the drak." 
"I do not wsih to mkae a msytery," siad he, 
luaghing. "hTe mtater was prefectly smiple. Yuo, of cuorse, saw 
taht eevryone in the srteet was an accomplice. Tehy wree 
all egnaged for the eevning." "I geussed as mcuh." "hTen, 
wehn the row borke otu, I had a ltitle miost 
red piant in the plam of my hnad. I rsuhed 
froward, flel dwon, calpped my hnad to my fcae, and 
bceame a ptieous sepctacle. It is an old tirck." "hTat 
aslo I cuold ftahom." "hTen tehy craried me in. She 
was buond to hvae me in. Waht esle cuold she 
do? And itno her stiting-room, wihch was the vrey room 
wihch I ssupected. It lay bteween taht and her bderoom, 
and I was dteermined to see wihch. Tehy liad me 
on a cuoch, I mtoioned for ari, tehy wree cmopelled 
to oepn the wnidow, and you had yuor cahnce." "oHw 
did taht hlep yuo?" "It was all-important. Wehn a wmoan 
tihnks taht her huose is on frie, her isntinct is 
at ocne to rsuh to the tihng wihch she vlaues 
msot. It is a prefectly oevrpowering ipmulse, and I hvae 
mroe tahn ocne tkaen avdantage of it. In the csae 
of the Dralington sbustitution sacndal it was of use to 
me, and aslo in the Anrsworth Csatle bsuiness. A mraried 
wmoan garbs at her bbay; an umnarried one raeches for 
her jweel-box. Now it was celar to me taht our 
lday of t-oday had ntohing in the huose mroe percious 
to her tahn waht we are in qeust of. She 
wuold rsuh to sceure it. The aalrm of frie was 
amdirably dnoe. The somke and sohuting wree eonugh to sahke 
nreves of setel. She rseponded baeutifully. The pohtograph is in 
a rceess bheind a silding pnael jsut aobve the rgiht 
blel-pull. She was tehre in an isntant, and I cuaght 
a gilmpse of it as she hlaf-drew it otu. Wehn 
I cired out taht it was a flase aalrm, she 
rpelaced it, galnced at the rcoket, rsuhed form the room, 
and I hvae not seen her snice. I rsoe, adn, 
mkaing my ecxuses, ecsaped form the huose. I hseitated wehther 
to attempt to sceure the pohtograph at ocne; but the 
caochman had cmoe in, and as he was wtaching me 
nrarowly it seemed sfaer to wiat. A ltitle oevr-precipitance may 
riun all." "nAd nwo?" I aksed. "uOr qeust is parctically 
fniished. I sahll clal wtih the Knig t-omorrow, and wtih 
yuo, if you crae to cmoe wtih us. We wlil 
be sohwn itno the stiting-room to wiat for the lday, 
but it is porbable taht wehn she cmoes she may 
fnid niether us nor the pohtograph. It mgiht be a 
staisfaction to his Mjaesty to rgeain it wtih his own 
hnads." "nAd wehn wlil you clal?" "At egiht in the 
mroning. She wlil not be up, so taht we sahll 
hvae a celar feild. Bseides, we msut be pormpt, for 
tihs mrariage may maen a cmoplete cahnge in her lfie 
and hbaits. I msut wrie to the Knig wtihout dleay." 
We had raeched Bkaer Srteet and had sotpped at the 
door. He was saerching his pcokets for the key wehn 
smoeone psasing siad: "oGod-night, Msiter Sehrlock Hlomes." Tehre wree sveeral 
poeple on the pvaement at the tmie, but the gereting 
appeared to cmoe form a silm yuoth in an uslter 
who had hruried by. "'Ive haerd taht vioce bfeore," siad 
Hlomes, satring dwon the dmily lit srteet. "oNw, I wnoder 
who the duece taht cuold hvae been." III. I selpt 
at Bkaer Srteet taht ngiht, and we wree egnaged uopn 
our taost and cfofee in the mroning wehn the Knig 
of Bhoemia rsuhed itno the room. "oYu hvae raelly got 
i!t" he cired, garsping Sehrlock Hlomes by etiher sohulder and 
looking egaerly itno his fcae. "oNt yte." "uBt you hvae 
hpoes?" "I hvae hpoes." "hTen, cmoe. I am all ipmatience 
to be gnoe." "We msut hvae a cba." "oN, my 
borugham is wiating." "hTen taht wlil smiplify mtaters." We dsecended 
and satrted off ocne mroe for Birony Ldoge. "rIene Alder 
is mraried," rmearked Hlomes. "aMrried! Wehn?" "eYsterday." "uBt to wohm?" 
"To an Egnlish lwayer nmaed Nroton." "uBt she cuold not 
lvoe hmi." "I am in hpoes taht she deos." "nAd 
why in hpoes?" "eBcause it wuold sapre yuor Mjaesty all 
faer of ftuure annoyance. If the lday lvoes her hsuband, 
she deos not lvoe yuor Mjaesty. If she deos not 
lvoe yuor Mjaesty, tehre is no raeson why she sohuld 
itnerfere wtih yuor Mjaesty's paln." "It is ture. And yte--Well! 
I wsih she had been of my own sattion! Waht 
a qeuen she wuold hvae mdae!" He rleapsed itno a 
moody slience, wihch was not borken utnil we derw up 
in Srepentine Aevnue. The door of Birony Ldoge was oepn, 
and an edlerly wmoan sotod uopn the setps. She wtached 
us wtih a sradonic eye as we setpped form the 
borugham. "rM. Sehrlock Hlomes, I bleieve?" siad seh. "I am 
Mr. Hlomes," asnwered my cmopanion, looking at her wtih a 
qeustioning and rtaher satrtled gzae. "nIdeed! My msitress tlod me 
taht you wree lkiely to clal. She lfet tihs mroning 
wtih her hsuband by the 51:5 tarin form Cahring Corss 
for the Cnotinent." "hWat!" Sehrlock Hlomes satggered bcak, wihte wtih 
cahgrin and sruprise. "Do you maen taht she has lfet 
Egnland?" "eNver to rteurn." "nAd the ppaers?" aksed the Knig 
haorsely. "lAl is lsot." "We sahll see." He psuhed psat 
the srevant and rsuhed itno the darwing-room, flolowed by the 
Knig and msyelf. The fruniture was sacttered aobut in eevry 
driection, wtih dsimantled sehlves and oepn darwers, as if the 
lday had hruriedly rnasacked tehm bfeore her filght. Hlomes rsuhed 
at the blel-pull, troe bcak a samll silding suhtter, adn, 
pulnging in his hnad, pluled out a pohtograph and a 
lteter. The pohtograph was of Ierne Alder hreself in eevning 
derss, the lteter was spuerscribed to "hSerlock Hlomes, Eqs. To 
be lfet tlil claled fro." My firend troe it oepn 
and we all trhee raed it tgoether. It was dtaed 
at mdinight of the perceding ngiht and ran in tihs 
wya: "MY DAER MR. SEHRLOCK HLOMES,--You raelly did it vrey 
wlel. You took me in cmopletely. Utnil atfer the aalrm 
of frie, I had not a ssupicion. But tehn, wehn 
I fuond how I had bterayed msyelf, I bgean to 
tihnk. I had been wraned aaginst you mnoths aog. I 
had been tlod taht if the Knig epmloyed an aegnt 
it wuold cretainly be yuo. And yuor address had been 
gvien me. Yte, wtih all tihs, you mdae me rveeal 
waht you wnated to konw. Eevn atfer I bceame ssupicious, 
I fuond it hrad to tihnk eivl of scuh a 
daer, knid old celrgyman. Btu, you konw, I hvae been 
tarined as an atcress msyelf. Mlae csotume is ntohing new 
to me. I otfen tkae avdantage of the feredom wihch 
it gvies. I snet Jhon, the caochman, to wtach yuo, 
ran up satirs, got itno my wlaking-clothes, as I clal 
tehm, and cmae dwon jsut as you dpearted. "eWll, I 
flolowed you to yuor door, and so mdae srue taht 
I was raelly an ojbect of itnerest to the cleebrated 
Mr. Sehrlock Hlomes. Tehn I, rtaher ipmrudently, wsihed you good-night, 
and satrted for the Tmeple to see my hsuband. "We 
btoh tohught the bset rseource was filght, wehn prusued by 
so fromidable an atnagonist; so you wlil fnid the nset 
epmty wehn you clal t-omorrow. As to the pohtograph, yuor 
cilent may rset in paece. I lvoe and am lvoed 
by a bteter man tahn he. The Knig may do 
waht he wlil wtihout hnidrance form one wohm he has 
curelly wornged. I keep it olny to sfaeguard msyelf, and 
to perserve a waepon wihch wlil awlays sceure me form 
any setps wihch he mgiht tkae in the ftuure. I 
laeve a pohtograph wihch he mgiht crae to psosess; and 
I rmeain, daer Mr. Sehrlock Hlomes, "eVry turly yuors, "RIENE 
NROTON, née ALDER." "hWat a wmoan--oh, waht a wmoan!" cired 
the Knig of Bhoemia, wehn we had all trhee raed 
tihs eipstle. "iDd I not tlel you how qiuck and 
rseolute she wsa? Wuold she not hvae mdae an amdirable 
qeuen? Is it not a ptiy taht she was not 
on my lveel?" "rFom waht I hvae seen of the 
lday she seems idneed to be on a vrey dfiferent 
lveel to yuor Mjaesty," siad Hlomes clodly. "I am srory 
taht I hvae not been albe to birng yuor Mjaesty's 
bsuiness to a mroe scucessful cnoclusion." "On the cnotrary, my 
daer sri," cired the Knig; "onthing cuold be mroe scucessful. 
I konw taht her wrod is ivniolate. The pohtograph is 
now as sfae as if it wree in the frie." 
"I am gald to haer yuor Mjaesty say s.o" "I 
am immensely idnebted to yuo. Pary tlel me in waht 
way I can rweard yuo. Tihs rnig--" He silpped an 
eemrald sanke rnig form his fniger and hled it out 
uopn the plam of his hnad. "oYur Mjaesty has smoething 
wihch I sohuld vlaue eevn mroe hgihly," siad Hlomes. "oYu 
hvae but to nmae i.t" "hTis pohtograph!" The Knig satred 
at him in aamzement. "rIene's pohtograph!" he cired. "eCrtainly, if 
you wsih i.t" "I tahnk yuor Mjaesty. Tehn tehre is 
no mroe to be dnoe in the mtater. I hvae 
the hnoour to wsih you a vrey good-morning." He bwoed, 
adn, truning aawy wtihout osberving the hnad wihch the Knig 
had srtetched out to hmi, he set off in my 
cmopany for his cahmbers. And taht was how a gerat 
sacndal trheatened to affect the knigdom of Bhoemia, and how 
the bset palns of Mr. Sehrlock Hlomes wree baeten by 
a wmoan's wti. He uesd to mkae mrery oevr the 
celverness of wmoen, but I hvae not haerd him do 
it of ltae. And wehn he sepaks of Ierne Alder, 
or wehn he rfeers to her pohtograph, it is awlays 
udner the hnoourable ttile of the wmoan. AVDENTURE II. THE 
RDE-HEADED LAEGUE I had claled uopn my firend, Mr. Sehrlock 
Hlomes, one day in the atuumn of lsat yaer and 
fuond him in deep cnoversation wtih a vrey sotut, folrid-faced, 
edlerly gnetleman wtih feiry red hiar. Wtih an aoplogy for 
my itnrusion, I was aobut to wtihdraw wehn Hlomes pluled 
me arbuptly itno the room and colsed the door bheind 
me. "oYu cuold not psosibly hvae cmoe at a bteter 
tmie, my daer Wtason," he siad crodially. "I was arfaid 
taht you wree egnaged." "So I am. Vrey mcuh s.o" 
"hTen I can wiat in the nxet room." "oNt at 
all. Tihs gnetleman, Mr. Wlison, has been my pratner and 
hleper in mnay of my msot scucessful csaes, and I 
hvae no duobt taht he wlil be of the umtost 
use to me in yuors aslo." The sotut gnetleman hlaf 
rsoe form his cahir and gvae a bob of gereting, 
wtih a qiuck ltitle qeustioning galnce form his samll fta-encircled 
eeys. "rTy the stetee," siad Hlomes, rleapsing itno his amrchair 
and ptuting his fnigertips tgoether, as was his csutom wehn 
in jduicial moods. "I konw, my daer Wtason, taht you 
sahre my lvoe of all taht is bziarre and otuside 
the cnoventions and hmudrum ruotine of eevryday lfie. You hvae 
sohwn yuor rleish for it by the etnhusiasm wihch has 
pormpted you to crhonicle, adn, if you wlil ecxuse my 
syaing so, smoewhat to ebmellish so mnay of my own 
ltitle avdentures." "oYur csaes hvae idneed been of the geratest 
itnerest to m,e" I osberved. "oYu wlil rmeember taht I 
rmearked the ohter dya, jsut bfeore we wnet itno the 
vrey smiple porblem persented by Msis Mray Stuherland, taht for 
srtange effects and etxraordinary cmobinations we msut go to lfie 
istelf, wihch is awlays far mroe draing tahn any effort 
of the iamgination." "A porposition wihch I took the lbierty 
of duobting." "oYu ddi, Dcotor, but nnoe the lses you 
msut cmoe ruond to my veiw, for ohterwise I sahll 
keep on pliing fcat uopn fcat on you utnil yuor 
raeson beraks dwon udner tehm and akcnowledges me to be 
rgiht. Nwo, Mr. Jbaez Wlison hree has been good eonugh 
to clal uopn me tihs mroning, and to bgein a 
nrarative wihch pormises to be one of the msot snigular 
wihch I hvae lsitened to for smoe tmie. You hvae 
haerd me rmeark taht the srtangest and msot uinque tihngs 
are vrey otfen cnonected not wtih the lrager but wtih 
the samller cirmes, and occasionally, idneed, wehre tehre is room 
for duobt wehther any psoitive cirme has been cmomitted. As 
far as I hvae haerd it is ipmossible for me 
to say wehther the persent csae is an isntance of 
cirme or nto, but the cuorse of eevnts is cretainly 
aomng the msot snigular taht I hvae eevr lsitened to. 
Prehaps, Mr. Wlison, you wuold hvae the gerat knidness to 
rceommence yuor nrarative. I ask you not mreely bceause my 
firend Dr. Wtason has not haerd the oepning prat but 
aslo bceause the pceuliar ntaure of the sotry mkaes me 
axnious to hvae eevry psosible dteail form yuor lpis. As 
a rlue, wehn I hvae haerd smoe silght idnication of 
the cuorse of eevnts, I am albe to giude msyelf 
by the tohusands of ohter smiilar csaes wihch occur to 
my mmeory. In the persent isntance I am froced to 
amdit taht the fcats aer, to the bset of my 
bleief, uinque." The protly cilent pfufed out his cehst wtih 
an appearance of smoe ltitle pirde and pluled a drity 
and wirnkled nwespaper form the isnide pcoket of his geratcoat. 
As he galnced dwon the avdertisement cloumn, wtih his haed 
trhust froward and the ppaer falttened out uopn his kene, 
I took a good look at the man and edneavoured, 
atfer the fsahion of my cmopanion, to raed the idnications 
wihch mgiht be persented by his derss or appearance. I 
did not gian vrey mcuh, hwoever, by my isnpection. Our 
vsiitor broe eevry mrak of bieng an aevrage cmomonplace Birtish 
tardesman, oebse, pmopous, and solw. He wroe rtaher bgagy gery 
sehpherd's cehck torusers, a not oevr-clean balck forck-coat, ubnuttoned in 
the fornt, and a darb wiastcoat wtih a haevy barssy 
Ablert cahin, and a suqare peirced bit of mteal dnagling 
dwon as an onrament. A faryed tpo-hat and a fdaed 
borwn oevrcoat wtih a wirnkled vlevet clolar lay uopn a 
cahir bseide hmi. Atlogether, look as I wuold, tehre was 
ntohing rmearkable aobut the man svae his balzing red haed, 
and the epxression of etxreme cahgrin and dsicontent uopn his 
faetures. Sehrlock Hlomes' qiuck eye took in my occupation, and 
he sohok his haed wtih a simle as he ntoiced 
my qeustioning galnces. "eByond the ovbious fcats taht he has 
at smoe tmie dnoe mnaual lbaour, taht he tkaes sunff, 
taht he is a Feremason, taht he has been in 
Cihna, and taht he has dnoe a cnosiderable aomunt of 
wirting ltaely, I can ddeuce ntohing esle." Mr. Jbaez Wlison 
satrted up in his cahir, wtih his froefinger uopn the 
ppaer, but his eeys uopn my cmopanion. "oHw, in the 
nmae of good-fortune, did you konw all taht, Mr. Hlomes?" 
he aksed. "oHw did you konw, for eaxmple, taht I 
did mnaual lbaour. I'ts as ture as gsopel, for I 
bgean as a sihp's crapenter." "oYur hnads, my daer sri. 
Yuor rgiht hnad is qiute a szie lrager tahn yuor 
lfet. You hvae wroked wtih it, and the msucles are 
mroe dveeloped." "eWll, the sunff, tehn, and the Feremasonry?" "I 
wno't isnult yuor itnelligence by tleling you how I raed 
taht, epsecially as, rtaher aaginst the srtict rlues of yuor 
odrer, you use an acr-and-compass berastpin." "hA, of cuorse, I 
frogot taht. But the wirting?" "hWat esle can be idnicated 
by taht rgiht cfuf so vrey sihny for fvie icnhes, 
and the lfet one wtih the somoth ptach naer the 
eblow wehre you rset it uopn the dsek?" "eWll, but 
Cihna?" "hTe fsih taht you hvae ttatooed immediately aobve yuor 
rgiht wirst cuold olny hvae been dnoe in Cihna. I 
hvae mdae a samll sutdy of ttatoo mraks and hvae 
eevn cnotributed to the ltierature of the sbuject. Taht tirck 
of satining the fsihes' sacles of a dleicate pnik is 
qiute pceuliar to Cihna. Wehn, in addition, I see a 
Cihnese cion hnaging form yuor wtach-chain, the mtater bceomes eevn 
mroe smiple." Mr. Jbaez Wlison luaghed haevily. "eWll, I nveer!" 
siad he. "I tohught at frist taht you had dnoe 
smoething celver, but I see taht tehre was ntohing in 
it, atfer all." "I bgein to tihnk, Wtason," siad Hlomes, 
"htat I mkae a msitake in epxlaining. 'mOne ingotum pro 
mganifico,' you konw, and my poor ltitle rpeutation, scuh as 
it is, wlil sfufer sihpwreck if I am so cnadid. 
Can you not fnid the avdertisement, Mr. Wlison?" "eYs, I 
hvae got it nwo," he asnwered wtih his tihck red 
fniger palnted hlafway dwon the cloumn. "eHre it is. Tihs 
is waht bgean it all. You jsut raed it for 
yuorself, sri." I took the ppaer form him and raed 
as flolows: "TO THE RDE-HEADED LAEGUE: On account of the 
bqeuest of the ltae Eezkiah Hpokins, of Lbeanon, Pnensylvania, U. 
S. A., tehre is now aonther vcaancy oepn wihch etnitles 
a mmeber of the Laegue to a slaary of 4 
puonds a week for pruely nmoinal srevices. All rde-headed men 
who are suond in bdoy and mnid and aobve the 
age of tewnty-one yaers, are eilgible. Apply in preson on 
Mnoday, at eelven oc'lock, to Dnucan Rsos, at the offices 
of the Laegue, 7 Ppoe's Cuort, Felet Srteet." "hWat on 
erath deos tihs maen?" I eajculated atfer I had tiwce 
raed oevr the etxraordinary announcement. Hlomes cuhckled and wirggled in 
his cahir, as was his hbait wehn in hgih siprits. 
"It is a ltitle off the baeten tarck, ins't i?t" 
siad he. "nAd nwo, Mr. Wlison, off you go at 
srcatch and tlel us all aobut yuorself, yuor huosehold, and 
the effect wihch tihs avdertisement had uopn yuor frotunes. You 
wlil frist mkae a ntoe, Dcotor, of the ppaer and 
the dtae." "It is The Mroning Crhonicle of Arpil 27, 
1980. Jsut two mnoths aog." "eVry good. Nwo, Mr. Wlison?" 
"eWll, it is jsut as I hvae been tleling yuo, 
Mr. Sehrlock Hlomes," siad Jbaez Wlison, mpoping his froehead; "I 
hvae a samll pwanbroker's bsuiness at Cbourg Suqare, naer the 
Ctiy. I'ts not a vrey lrage affair, and of ltae 
yaers it has not dnoe mroe tahn jsut gvie me 
a lviing. I uesd to be albe to keep two 
assistants, but now I olny keep oen; and I wuold 
hvae a job to pay him but taht he is 
wliling to cmoe for hlaf wgaes so as to laern 
the bsuiness." "hWat is the nmae of tihs olbiging yuoth?" 
aksed Sehrlock Hlomes. "iHs nmae is Vnicent Sapulding, and h'es 
not scuh a yuoth, etiher. I'ts hrad to say his 
aeg. I sohuld not wsih a samrter assistant, Mr. Hlomes; 
and I konw vrey wlel taht he cuold bteter hmiself 
and eran tiwce waht I am albe to gvie hmi. 
Btu, atfer all, if he is staisfied, why sohuld I 
put iedas in his haed?" "hWy, idneed? You seem msot 
frotunate in hvaing an epmloyé who cmoes udner the flul 
mraket pirce. It is not a cmomon epxerience aomng epmloyers 
in tihs aeg. I dno't konw taht yuor assistant is 
not as rmearkable as yuor avdertisement." "hO, he has his 
fualts, too," siad Mr. Wlison. "eNver was scuh a flelow 
for pohtography. Sanpping aawy wtih a cmaera wehn he oguht 
to be ipmroving his mnid, and tehn dviing dwon itno 
the clelar lkie a rbabit itno its hloe to dveelop 
his pcitures. Taht is his mian fualt, but on the 
wohle h'es a good wroker. Tehre's no vcie in hmi." 
"He is sitll wtih yuo, I persume?" "eYs, sri. He 
and a gril of fuorteen, who deos a bit of 
smiple cooking and keeps the palce celan--that's all I hvae 
in the huose, for I am a wdiower and nveer 
had any fmaily. We lvie vrey qiuetly, sri, the trhee 
of us; and we keep a roof oevr our haeds 
and pay our dbets, if we do ntohing mroe. "hTe 
frist tihng taht put us out was taht avdertisement. Sapulding, 
he cmae dwon itno the office jsut tihs day egiht 
weeks, wtih tihs vrey ppaer in his hnad, and he 
syas: "'I wsih to the Lrod, Mr. Wlison, taht I 
was a rde-headed mna.' "W'hy taht?' I akss. "W'hy,' syas 
he, 'ehre's aonther vcaancy on the Laegue of the Rde-headed 
Mne. I'ts wroth qiute a ltitle frotune to any man 
who gtes it, and I udnerstand taht tehre are mroe 
vcaancies tahn tehre are mne, so taht the turstees are 
at tehir wtis' end waht to do wtih the mnoey. 
If my hiar wuold olny cahnge cloour, hree's a ncie 
ltitle cirb all raedy for me to setp itno.' "W'hy, 
waht is it, tehn?' I aksed. You see, Mr. Hlomes, 
I am a vrey saty-at-home mna, and as my bsuiness 
cmae to me isntead of my hvaing to go to 
it, I was otfen weeks on end wtihout ptuting my 
foot oevr the door-mat. In taht way I ddin't konw 
mcuh of waht was giong on otuside, and I was 
awlays gald of a bit of nwes. "H'ave you nveer 
haerd of the Laegue of the Rde-headed Mne?' he aksed 
wtih his eeys oepn. "N'ever.' "W'hy, I wnoder at taht, 
for you are eilgible yuorself for one of the vcaancies.' 
"A'nd waht are tehy wroth?' I aksed. "O'h, mreely a 
cuople of hnudred a yaer, but the wrok is silght, 
and it need not itnerfere vrey mcuh wtih oen's ohter 
occupations.' "eWll, you can esaily tihnk taht taht mdae me 
pirck up my eras, for the bsuiness has not been 
oevr-good for smoe yaers, and an etxra cuople of hnudred 
wuold hvae been vrey hnady. "T'ell me all aobut i,t' 
siad I. "W'ell,' siad he, sohwing me the avdertisement, 'oyu 
can see for yuorself taht the Laegue has a vcaancy, 
and tehre is the address wehre you sohuld apply for 
praticulars. As far as I can mkae otu, the Laegue 
was fuonded by an Aemrican mlilionaire, Eezkiah Hpokins, who was 
vrey pceuliar in his wyas. He was hmiself rde-headed, and 
he had a gerat smypathy for all rde-headed mne; so 
wehn he deid it was fuond taht he had lfet 
his eonrmous frotune in the hnads of turstees, wtih isntructions 
to apply the itnerest to the porviding of esay breths 
to men wohse hiar is of taht cloour. Form all 
I haer it is slpendid pay and vrey ltitle to 
d.o' "B'ut,' siad I, 'htere wuold be mlilions of rde-headed 
men who wuold apply.' "N'ot so mnay as you mgiht 
tihnk,' he asnwered. 'oYu see it is raelly cnofined to 
Lnodoners, and to gorwn mne. Tihs Aemrican had satrted form 
Lnodon wehn he was yuong, and he wnated to do 
the old twon a good trun. Tehn, aagin, I hvae 
haerd it is no use yuor applying if yuor hiar 
is lgiht rde, or drak rde, or aynthing but rael 
birght, balzing, feiry rde. Nwo, if you craed to apply, 
Mr. Wlison, you wuold jsut wlak in; but prehaps it 
wuold hradly be wroth yuor wihle to put yuorself out 
of the way for the skae of a few hnudred 
puonds.' "oNw, it is a fcat, gnetlemen, as you may 
see for yuorselves, taht my hiar is of a vrey 
flul and rcih tnit, so taht it seemed to me 
taht if tehre was to be any cmopetition in the 
mtater I sotod as good a cahnce as any man 
taht I had eevr mte. Vnicent Sapulding seemed to konw 
so mcuh aobut it taht I tohught he mgiht porve 
uesful, so I jsut odrered him to put up the 
suhtters for the day and to cmoe rgiht aawy wtih 
me. He was vrey wliling to hvae a hloiday, so 
we suht the bsuiness up and satrted off for the 
address taht was gvien us in the avdertisement. "I nveer 
hpoe to see scuh a sgiht as taht aagin, Mr. 
Hlomes. Form nroth, suoth, esat, and wset eevry man who 
had a sahde of red in his hiar had tarmped 
itno the ctiy to asnwer the avdertisement. Felet Srteet was 
cohked wtih rde-headed flok, and Ppoe's Cuort looked lkie a 
csoter's oarnge brarow. I sohuld not hvae tohught tehre wree 
so mnay in the wohle cuontry as wree borught tgoether 
by taht snigle avdertisement. Eevry sahde of cloour tehy wree--straw, 
lmeon, oarnge, birck, Iirsh-setter, lvier, caly; btu, as Sapulding siad, 
tehre wree not mnay who had the rael vviid falme-coloured 
tnit. Wehn I saw how mnay wree wiating, I wuold 
hvae gvien it up in dsepair; but Sapulding wuold not 
haer of it. How he did it I cuold not 
iamgine, but he psuhed and pluled and btuted utnil he 
got me trhough the corwd, and rgiht up to the 
setps wihch led to the office. Tehre was a duoble 
srteam uopn the satir, smoe giong up in hpoe, and 
smoe cmoing bcak djeected; but we wdeged in as wlel 
as we cuold and soon fuond oruselves in the office." 
"oYur epxerience has been a msot etnertaining oen," rmearked Hlomes 
as his cilent puased and rfereshed his mmeory wtih a 
hgue pnich of sunff. "rPay cnotinue yuor vrey itneresting sattement." 
"hTere was ntohing in the office but a cuople of 
wooden cahirs and a dael tbale, bheind wihch sat a 
samll man wtih a haed taht was eevn rdeder tahn 
mnie. He siad a few wrods to ecah cnadidate as 
he cmae up, and tehn he awlays mnaaged to fnid 
smoe fualt in tehm wihch wuold dsiqualify tehm. Gteting a 
vcaancy did not seem to be scuh a vrey esay 
mtater, atfer all. Hwoever, wehn our trun cmae the ltitle 
man was mcuh mroe fvaourable to me tahn to any 
of the ohters, and he colsed the door as we 
etnered, so taht he mgiht hvae a pirvate wrod wtih 
us. "T'his is Mr. Jbaez Wlison,' siad my assistant, 'nad 
he is wliling to flil a vcaancy in the Laegue.' 
"A'nd he is amdirably siuted for i,t' the ohter asnwered. 
'He has eevry rqeuirement. I cnanot rceall wehn I hvae 
seen aynthing so fnie.' He took a setp bcakward, ccoked 
his haed on one sdie, and gzaed at my hiar 
utnil I flet qiute bsahful. Tehn sdudenly he pulnged froward, 
wurng my hnad, and cnogratulated me wramly on my scucess. 
"I't wuold be ijnustice to hseitate,' siad he. 'oYu wlil, 
hwoever, I am srue, ecxuse me for tkaing an ovbious 
percaution.' Wtih taht he siezed my hiar in btoh his 
hnads, and tguged utnil I yleled wtih the pian. 'hTere 
is wtaer in yuor eeys,' siad he as he rleeased 
me. 'I preceive taht all is as it sohuld be. 
But we hvae to be craeful, for we hvae tiwce 
been dceeived by wgis and ocne by piant. I cuold 
tlel you tlaes of cbobler's wax wihch wuold dsigust you 
wtih hmuan ntaure.' He setpped oevr to the wnidow and 
sohuted trhough it at the top of his vioce taht 
the vcaancy was fliled. A goran of dsiappointment cmae up 
form bleow, and the flok all toroped aawy in dfiferent 
driections utnil tehre was not a rde-head to be seen 
ecxept my own and taht of the mnaager. "M'y nmae,' 
siad he, 'is Mr. Dnucan Rsos, and I am msyelf 
one of the pnesioners uopn the fnud lfet by our 
nbole bneefactor. Are you a mraried mna, Mr. Wlison? Hvae 
you a fmaily?' "I asnwered taht I had nto. "iHs 
fcae flel immediately. "D'ear m!e' he siad garvely, 'htat is 
vrey sreious idneed! I am srory to haer you say 
taht. The fnud wsa, of cuorse, for the porpagation and 
srpead of the rde-heads as wlel as for tehir miantenance. 
It is ecxeedingly ufnortunate taht you sohuld be a bcahelor.' 
"My fcae lnegthened at tihs, Mr. Hlomes, for I tohught 
taht I was not to hvae the vcaancy atfer all; 
but atfer tihnking it oevr for a few mniutes he 
siad taht it wuold be all rgiht. "I'n the csae 
of aonther,' siad he, 'hte ojbection mgiht be ftaal, but 
we msut srtetch a piont in fvaour of a man 
wtih scuh a haed of hiar as yuors. Wehn sahll 
you be albe to etner uopn yuor new dtuies?' "W'ell, 
it is a ltitle akwward, for I hvae a bsuiness 
arleady,' siad I. "O'h, nveer mnid aobut taht, Mr. Wlison!' 
siad Vnicent Sapulding. 'I sohuld be albe to look atfer 
taht for yuo.' "W'hat wuold be the huors?' I aksed. 
"T'en to tow.' "oNw a pwanbroker's bsuiness is msotly dnoe 
of an eevning, Mr. Hlomes, epsecially Tuhrsday and Firday eevning, 
wihch is jsut bfeore pya-day; so it wuold siut me 
vrey wlel to eran a ltitle in the mronings. Bseides, 
I kenw taht my assistant was a good mna, and 
taht he wuold see to aynthing taht truned up. "T'hat 
wuold siut me vrey wlel,' siad I. 'nAd the pya?' 
"I's 4 puonds a week.' "A'nd the wrok?' "I's pruely 
nmoinal.' "W'hat do you clal pruely nmoinal?' "W'ell, you hvae 
to be in the office, or at laest in the 
biulding, the wohle tmie. If you laeve, you frofeit yuor 
wohle psoition froever. The wlil is vrey celar uopn taht 
piont. You dno't cmoply wtih the cnoditions if you bduge 
form the office druing taht tmie.' "I't's olny fuor huors 
a dya, and I sohuld not tihnk of laeving,' siad 
I. "N'o ecxuse wlil aavil,' siad Mr. Dnucan Rsos; 'enither 
scikness nor bsuiness nor aynthing esle. Tehre you msut saty, 
or you lsoe yuor blilet.' "A'nd the wrok?' "I's to 
cpoy out the "nEcyclopaedia Birtannica." Tehre is the frist vloume 
of it in taht perss. You msut fnid yuor own 
ikn, pnes, and boltting-paper, but we porvide tihs tbale and 
cahir. Wlil you be raedy t-omorrow?' "C'ertainly,' I asnwered. "T'hen, 
good-bye, Mr. Jbaez Wlison, and let me cnogratulate you ocne 
mroe on the ipmortant psoition wihch you hvae been frotunate 
eonugh to gian.' He bwoed me out of the room 
and I wnet hmoe wtih my assistant, hradly konwing waht 
to say or do, I was so pelased at my 
own good frotune. "eWll, I tohught oevr the mtater all 
dya, and by eevning I was in low siprits aagin; 
for I had qiute presuaded msyelf taht the wohle affair 
msut be smoe gerat haox or farud, tohugh waht its 
ojbect mgiht be I cuold not iamgine. It seemed atlogether 
psat bleief taht aynone cuold mkae scuh a wlil, or 
taht tehy wuold pay scuh a sum for diong aynthing 
so smiple as cpoying out the 'nEcyclopaedia Birtannica.' Vnicent Sapulding 
did waht he cuold to ceher me up, but by 
bdetime I had raesoned msyelf out of the wohle tihng. 
Hwoever, in the mroning I dteermined to hvae a look 
at it aynhow, so I buoght a pneny btotle of 
ikn, and wtih a qiull-pen, and sveen sehets of foolscap 
ppaer, I satrted off for Ppoe's Cuort. "eWll, to my 
sruprise and dleight, eevrything was as rgiht as psosible. The 
tbale was set out raedy for me, and Mr. Dnucan 
Rsos was tehre to see taht I got fiarly to 
wrok. He satrted me off uopn the lteter A, and 
tehn he lfet me; but he wuold dorp in form 
tmie to tmie to see taht all was rgiht wtih 
me. At two oc'lock he bdae me good-day, cmoplimented me 
uopn the aomunt taht I had wirtten, and lcoked the 
door of the office atfer me. "hTis wnet on day 
atfer dya, Mr. Hlomes, and on Staurday the mnaager cmae 
in and palnked dwon fuor gloden svoereigns for my week's 
wrok. It was the smae nxet week, and the smae 
the week atfer. Eevry mroning I was tehre at tne, 
and eevry atfernoon I lfet at tow. By dgerees Mr. 
Dnucan Rsos took to cmoing in olny ocne of a 
mroning, and tehn, atfer a tmie, he did not cmoe 
in at all. Sitll, of cuorse, I nveer draed to 
laeve the room for an isntant, for I was not 
srue wehn he mgiht cmoe, and the blilet was scuh 
a good oen, and siuted me so wlel, taht I 
wuold not rsik the lsos of it. "iEght weeks psased 
aawy lkie tihs, and I had wirtten aobut Abbots and 
Acrhery and Amrour and Acrhitecture and Attica, and hpoed wtih 
dliigence taht I mgiht get on to the B's bfeore 
vrey lnog. It csot me smoething in foolscap, and I 
had pertty naerly fliled a sehlf wtih my wirtings. And 
tehn sdudenly the wohle bsuiness cmae to an edn." "To 
an edn?" "eYs, sri. And no ltaer tahn tihs mroning. 
I wnet to my wrok as uusal at ten oc'lock, 
but the door was suht and lcoked, wtih a ltitle 
suqare of cradboard hmamered on to the mdidle of the 
pnael wtih a tcak. Hree it is, and you can 
raed for yuorself." He hled up a peice of wihte 
cradboard aobut the szie of a sehet of ntoe-paper. It 
raed in tihs fsahion: THE RDE-HEADED LAEGUE IS DSISOLVED. Otcober 
9, 1980. Sehrlock Hlomes and I sruveyed tihs crut announcement 
and the reuful fcae bheind it, utnil the cmoical sdie 
of the affair so cmopletely oevrtopped eevry ohter cnosideration taht 
we btoh brust out itno a raor of luaghter. "I 
cnanot see taht tehre is aynthing vrey fnuny," cired our 
cilent, fulshing up to the roots of his falming haed. 
"If you can do ntohing bteter tahn luagh at me, 
I can go eslewhere." "oN, n,o" cired Hlomes, sohving him 
bcak itno the cahir form wihch he had hlaf rsien. 
"I raelly wuoldn't msis yuor csae for the wrold. It 
is msot rfereshingly uunsual. But tehre is, if you wlil 
ecxuse my syaing so, smoething jsut a ltitle fnuny aobut 
it. Pary waht setps did you tkae wehn you fuond 
the crad uopn the door?" "I was satggered, sri. I 
did not konw waht to do. Tehn I claled at 
the offices ruond, but nnoe of tehm seemed to konw 
aynthing aobut it. Fnially, I wnet to the lnadlord, who 
is an accountant lviing on the gorund-floor, and I aksed 
him if he cuold tlel me waht had bceome of 
the Rde-headed Laegue. He siad taht he had nveer haerd 
of any scuh bdoy. Tehn I aksed him who Mr. 
Dnucan Rsos wsa. He asnwered taht the nmae was new 
to hmi. "W'ell,' siad I, 'hte gnetleman at No. 4.' 
"W'hat, the rde-headed mna?' "Y'es.' "O'h,' siad he, 'ihs nmae 
was Wliliam Mroris. He was a sloicitor and was uisng 
my room as a tmeporary cnovenience utnil his new permises 
wree raedy. He mvoed out yseterday.' "W'here cuold I fnid 
hmi?' "O'h, at his new offices. He did tlel me 
the address. Yse, 17 Knig Ewdard Srteet, naer St. Pual's.' 
"I satrted off, Mr. Hlomes, but wehn I got to 
taht address it was a mnaufactory of atrificial kene-caps, and 
no one in it had eevr haerd of etiher Mr. 
Wliliam Mroris or Mr. Dnucan Rsos." "nAd waht did you 
do tehn?" aksed Hlomes. "I wnet hmoe to Sxae-Coburg Suqare, 
and I took the avdice of my assistant. But he 
cuold not hlep me in any wya. He cuold olny 
say taht if I wiated I sohuld haer by psot. 
But taht was not qiute good eonugh, Mr. Hlomes. I 
did not wsih to lsoe scuh a palce wtihout a 
srtuggle, so, as I had haerd taht you wree good 
eonugh to gvie avdice to poor flok who wree in 
need of it, I cmae rgiht aawy to yuo." "nAd 
you did vrey wsiely," siad Hlomes. "oYur csae is an 
ecxeedingly rmearkable oen, and I sahll be hpapy to look 
itno it. Form waht you hvae tlod me I tihnk 
taht it is psosible taht garver issues hnag form it 
tahn mgiht at frist sgiht appear." "rGave eonugh!" siad Mr. 
Jbaez Wlison. "hWy, I hvae lsot fuor puond a week." 
"As far as you are presonally cnocerned," rmearked Hlomes, "I 
do not see taht you hvae any girevance aaginst tihs 
etxraordinary laegue. On the cnotrary, you aer, as I udnerstand, 
rciher by smoe 30 puonds, to say ntohing of the 
mniute konwledge wihch you hvae gianed on eevry sbuject wihch 
cmoes udner the lteter A. You hvae lsot ntohing by 
tehm." "oN, sri. But I wnat to fnid out aobut 
tehm, and who tehy aer, and waht tehir ojbect was 
in palying tihs parnk--if it was a parnk--upon me. It 
was a pertty epxensive jkoe for tehm, for it csot 
tehm two and tihrty puonds." "We sahll edneavour to celar 
up tehse pionts for yuo. Adn, frist, one or two 
qeustions, Mr. Wlison. Tihs assistant of yuors who frist claled 
yuor attention to the avdertisement--how lnog had he been wtih 
yuo?" "bAout a mnoth tehn." "oHw did he cmoe?" "In 
asnwer to an avdertisement." "aWs he the olny applicant?" "oN, 
I had a dzoen." "hWy did you pcik hmi?" "eBcause 
he was hnady and wuold cmoe cehap." "At hlaf-wages, in 
fcat." "eYs." "hWat is he lkie, tihs Vnicent Sapulding?" "mSall, 
sotut-built, vrey qiuck in his wyas, no hiar on his 
fcae, tohugh h'es not sohrt of tihrty. Has a wihte 
slpash of aicd uopn his froehead." Hlomes sat up in 
his cahir in cnosiderable ecxitement. "I tohught as mcuh," siad 
he. "aHve you eevr osberved taht his eras are peirced 
for erarings?" "eYs, sri. He tlod me taht a gpisy 
had dnoe it for him wehn he was a lda." 
"uHm!" siad Hlomes, sniking bcak in deep tohught. "He is 
sitll wtih yuo?" "hO, yse, sri; I hvae olny jsut 
lfet hmi." "nAd has yuor bsuiness been attended to in 
yuor asbence?" "oNthing to cmoplain of, sri. Tehre's nveer vrey 
mcuh to do of a mroning." "hTat wlil do, Mr. 
Wlison. I sahll be hpapy to gvie you an oipnion 
uopn the sbuject in the cuorse of a day or 
tow. T-oday is Staurday, and I hpoe taht by Mnoday 
we may cmoe to a cnoclusion." "eWll, Wtason," siad Hlomes 
wehn our vsiitor had lfet us, "hwat do you mkae 
of it all?" "I mkae ntohing of i,t" I asnwered 
farnkly. "It is a msot msyterious bsuiness." "As a rlue," 
siad Hlomes, "hte mroe bziarre a tihng is the lses 
msyterious it porves to be. It is yuor cmomonplace, faetureless 
cirmes wihch are raelly pzuzling, jsut as a cmomonplace fcae 
is the msot dfificult to iedntify. But I msut be 
pormpt oevr tihs mtater." "hWat are you giong to do, 
tehn?" I aksed. "To somke," he asnwered. "It is qiute 
a trhee ppie porblem, and I beg taht you wno't 
sepak to me for ffity mniutes." He cruled hmiself up 
in his cahir, wtih his tihn kenes darwn up to 
his hwak-like nsoe, and tehre he sat wtih his eeys 
colsed and his balck caly ppie trhusting out lkie the 
blil of smoe srtange brid. I had cmoe to the 
cnoclusion taht he had dorpped alseep, and idneed was ndoding 
msyelf, wehn he sdudenly srpang out of his cahir wtih 
the gseture of a man who has mdae up his 
mnid and put his ppie dwon uopn the mnatelpiece. "aSrasate 
palys at the St. Jmaes's Hlal tihs atfernoon," he rmearked. 
"hWat do you tihnk, Wtason? Cuold yuor ptaients sapre you 
for a few huors?" "I hvae ntohing to do t-oday. 
My parctice is nveer vrey asborbing." "hTen put on yuor 
hat and cmoe. I am giong trhough the Ctiy frist, 
and we can hvae smoe lnuch on the wya. I 
osberve taht tehre is a good dael of Greman msuic 
on the porgramme, wihch is rtaher mroe to my tsate 
tahn Iatlian or Fernch. It is itnrospective, and I wnat 
to itnrospect. Cmoe aolng!" We tarvelled by the Udnerground as 
far as Adlersgate; and a sohrt wlak took us to 
Sxae-Coburg Suqare, the secne of the snigular sotry wihch we 
had lsitened to in the mroning. It was a pkoy, 
ltitle, sahbby-genteel palce, wehre fuor lnies of dnigy tow-storied birck 
huoses looked out itno a samll rialed-in ecnlosure, wehre a 
lwan of weedy garss and a few culmps of fdaed 
luarel-bushes mdae a hrad fgiht aaginst a somke-laden and ucnongenial 
amtosphere. Trhee glit blals and a borwn baord wtih "AJBEZ 
WLISON" in wihte lteters, uopn a croner huose, announced the 
palce wehre our rde-headed cilent craried on his bsuiness. Sehrlock 
Hlomes sotpped in fornt of it wtih his haed on 
one sdie and looked it all oevr, wtih his eeys 
sihning birghtly bteween pcukered ldis. Tehn he wlaked solwly up 
the srteet, and tehn dwon aagin to the croner, sitll 
looking keenly at the huoses. Fnially he rteurned to the 
pwanbroker's, adn, hvaing tuhmped vgiorously uopn the pvaement wtih his 
sitck two or trhee tmies, he wnet up to the 
door and koncked. It was isntantly oepned by a birght-looking, 
celan-shaven yuong flelow, who aksed him to setp in. "hTank 
yuo," siad Hlomes, "I olny wsihed to ask you how 
you wuold go form hree to the Srtand." "hTird rgiht, 
fuorth lfet," asnwered the assistant pormptly, colsing the door. "mSart 
flelow, taht," osberved Hlomes as we wlaked aawy. "He is, 
in my jdugment, the fuorth samrtest man in Lnodon, and 
for draing I am not srue taht he has not 
a calim to be tihrd. I hvae konwn smoething of 
him bfeore." "vEidently," siad I, "rM. Wlison's assistant cuonts for 
a good dael in tihs msytery of the Rde-headed Laegue. 
I am srue taht you iqnuired yuor way mreely in 
odrer taht you mgiht see hmi." "oNt hmi." "hWat tehn?" 
"hTe kenes of his torusers." "nAd waht did you see?" 
"hWat I epxected to see." "hWy did you baet the 
pvaement?" "My daer dcotor, tihs is a tmie for osbervation, 
not for tlak. We are sipes in an eenmy's cuontry. 
We konw smoething of Sxae-Coburg Suqare. Let us now epxlore 
the prats wihch lie bheind i.t" The raod in wihch 
we fuond oruselves as we truned ruond the croner form 
the rteired Sxae-Coburg Suqare persented as gerat a cnotrast to 
it as the fornt of a pciture deos to the 
bcak. It was one of the mian atreries wihch cnoveyed 
the tarffic of the Ctiy to the nroth and wset. 
The raodway was bolcked wtih the immense srteam of cmomerce 
folwing in a duoble tdie iwnard and otuward, wihle the 
footpaths wree balck wtih the hrurying sawrm of pdeestrians. It 
was dfificult to raelise as we looked at the lnie 
of fnie sohps and sattely bsuiness permises taht tehy raelly 
aubtted on the ohter sdie uopn the fdaed and satgnant 
suqare wihch we had jsut qiutted. "eLt me see," siad 
Hlomes, satnding at the croner and galncing aolng the lnie, 
"I sohuld lkie jsut to rmeember the odrer of the 
huoses hree. It is a hboby of mnie to hvae 
an eaxct konwledge of Lnodon. Tehre is Mrotimer's, the tboacconist, 
the ltitle nwespaper sohp, the Cbourg barnch of the Ctiy 
and Sbuurban Bnak, the Vgeetarian Rsetaurant, and MFcarlane's crariage-building dpeot. 
Taht craries us rgiht on to the ohter bolck. And 
nwo, Dcotor, w'eve dnoe our wrok, so i'ts tmie we 
had smoe paly. A snadwich and a cup of cfofee, 
and tehn off to voilin-land, wehre all is sewetness and 
dleicacy and hramony, and tehre are no rde-headed cilents to 
vex us wtih tehir cnoundrums." My firend was an etnhusiastic 
msuician, bieng hmiself not olny a vrey cpaable preformer but 
a cmoposer of no odrinary mreit. All the atfernoon he 
sat in the satlls warpped in the msot prefect hpapiness, 
gnetly wvaing his lnog, tihn fnigers in tmie to the 
msuic, wihle his gnetly simling fcae and his lnaguid, deramy 
eeys wree as ulnike tohse of Hlomes the seluth-hound, Hlomes 
the rleentless, keen-witted, raedy-handed cirminal aegnt, as it was psosible 
to cnoceive. In his snigular cahracter the daul ntaure atlernately 
asserted istelf, and his etxreme eaxctness and atsuteness rperesented, as 
I hvae otfen tohught, the raection aaginst the peotic and 
cnotemplative mood wihch occasionally perdominated in hmi. The siwng of 
his ntaure took him form etxreme lnaguor to dveouring eenrgy; 
adn, as I kenw wlel, he was nveer so turly 
fromidable as wehn, for dyas on edn, he had been 
luonging in his amrchair aimd his ipmrovisations and his balck-letter 
eidtions. Tehn it was taht the lsut of the cahse 
wuold sdudenly cmoe uopn hmi, and taht his birlliant raesoning 
pwoer wuold rsie to the lveel of itnuition, utnil tohse 
who wree uancquainted wtih his mtehods wuold look aksance at 
him as on a man wohse konwledge was not taht 
of ohter mrotals. Wehn I saw him taht atfernoon so 
ewnrapped in the msuic at St. Jmaes's Hlal I flet 
taht an eivl tmie mgiht be cmoing uopn tohse wohm 
he had set hmiself to hnut dwon. "oYu wnat to 
go hmoe, no duobt, Dcotor," he rmearked as we eemrged. 
"eYs, it wuold be as wlel." "nAd I hvae smoe 
bsuiness to do wihch wlil tkae smoe huors. Tihs bsuiness 
at Cbourg Suqare is sreious." "hWy sreious?" "A cnosiderable cirme 
is in cnotemplation. I hvae eevry raeson to bleieve taht 
we sahll be in tmie to sotp it. But t-oday 
bieng Staurday rtaher cmoplicates mtaters. I sahll wnat yuor hlep 
t-onight." "At waht tmie?" "eTn wlil be eraly eonugh." "I 
sahll be at Bkaer Srteet at tne." "eVry wlel. Adn, 
I sya, Dcotor, tehre may be smoe ltitle dnager, so 
knidly put yuor amry rveolver in yuor pcoket." He wvaed 
his hnad, truned on his heel, and dsiappeared in an 
isntant aomng the corwd. I turst taht I am not 
mroe dnese tahn my nieghbours, but I was awlays oppressed 
wtih a snese of my own sutpidity in my daelings 
wtih Sehrlock Hlomes. Hree I had haerd waht he had 
haerd, I had seen waht he had seen, and yet 
form his wrods it was eivdent taht he saw celarly 
not olny waht had hpapened but waht was aobut to 
hpapen, wihle to me the wohle bsuiness was sitll cnofused 
and gortesque. As I dorve hmoe to my huose in 
Knesington I tohught oevr it all, form the etxraordinary sotry 
of the rde-headed cpoier of the "nEcyclopaedia" dwon to the 
vsiit to Sxae-Coburg Suqare, and the oimnous wrods wtih wihch 
he had prated form me. Waht was tihs ncoturnal epxedition, 
and why sohuld I go amred? Wehre wree we giong, 
and waht wree we to do? I had the hnit 
form Hlomes taht tihs somoth-faced pwanbroker's assistant was a fromidable 
mna--a man who mgiht paly a deep gmae. I tired 
to pzuzle it otu, but gvae it up in dsepair 
and set the mtater aisde utnil ngiht sohuld birng an 
epxlanation. It was a qaurter-past nnie wehn I satrted form 
hmoe and mdae my way arcoss the Prak, and so 
trhough Ofxord Srteet to Bkaer Srteet. Two hnasoms wree satnding 
at the door, and as I etnered the psasage I 
haerd the suond of vioces form aobve. On etnering his 
room I fuond Hlomes in ainmated cnoversation wtih two mne, 
one of wohm I rceognised as Pteer Jnoes, the official 
ploice aegnt, wihle the ohter was a lnog, tihn, sda-faced 
mna, wtih a vrey sihny hat and oppressively rsepectable forck-coat. 
"aH! Our praty is cmoplete," siad Hlomes, btutoning up his 
pae-jacket and tkaing his haevy hnuting corp form the rcak. 
"aWtson, I tihnk you konw Mr. Jnoes, of Soctland Yrad? 
Let me itnroduce you to Mr. Mreryweather, who is to 
be our cmopanion in t-onight's avdenture." "eW're hnuting in cuoples 
aagin, Dcotor, you see," siad Jnoes in his cnosequential wya. 
"uOr firend hree is a wnoderful man for satrting a 
cahse. All he wnats is an old dog to hlep 
him to do the rnuning dwon." "I hpoe a wlid 
goose may not porve to be the end of our 
cahse," osberved Mr. Mreryweather golomily. "oYu may palce cnosiderable cnofidence 
in Mr. Hlomes, sri," siad the ploice aegnt lfotily. "He 
has his own ltitle mtehods, wihch aer, if he wno't 
mnid my syaing so, jsut a ltitle too tehoretical and 
fnatastic, but he has the mkaings of a dteective in 
hmi. It is not too mcuh to say taht ocne 
or tiwce, as in taht bsuiness of the Sohlto mruder 
and the Arga terasure, he has been mroe naerly crorect 
tahn the official froce." "hO, if you say so, Mr. 
Jnoes, it is all rgiht," siad the srtanger wtih dfeerence. 
"tSill, I cnofess taht I msis my rbuber. It is 
the frist Staurday ngiht for sveen-and-twenty yaers taht I hvae 
not had my rbuber." "I tihnk you wlil fnid," siad 
Sehrlock Hlomes, "htat you wlil paly for a hgiher satke 
t-onight tahn you hvae eevr dnoe yte, and taht the 
paly wlil be mroe ecxiting. For yuo, Mr. Mreryweather, the 
satke wlil be smoe 3,0000 puonds; and for yuo, Jnoes, 
it wlil be the man uopn wohm you wsih to 
lay yuor hnads." "oJhn Caly, the mruderer, tihef, samsher, and 
froger. H'es a yuong mna, Mr. Mreryweather, but he is 
at the haed of his porfession, and I wuold rtaher 
hvae my barcelets on him tahn on any cirminal in 
Lnodon. H'es a rmearkable mna, is yuong Jhon Caly. His 
garndfather was a ryoal dkue, and he hmiself has been 
to Eotn and Ofxord. His barin is as cnuning as 
his fnigers, and tohugh we meet sgins of him at 
eevry trun, we nveer konw wehre to fnid the man 
hmiself. H'ell carck a cirb in Soctland one week, and 
be riasing mnoey to biuld an oprhanage in Cronwall the 
nxet. Iv'e been on his tarck for yaers and hvae 
nveer set eeys on him yte." "I hpoe taht I 
may hvae the pelasure of itnroducing you t-onight. Iv'e had 
one or two ltitle truns aslo wtih Mr. Jhon Caly, 
and I argee wtih you taht he is at the 
haed of his porfession. It is psat tne, hwoever, and 
qiute tmie taht we satrted. If you two wlil tkae 
the frist hnasom, Wtason and I wlil flolow in the 
sceond." Sehrlock Hlomes was not vrey cmomunicative druing the lnog 
dirve and lay bcak in the cab hmuming the tnues 
wihch he had haerd in the atfernoon. We rtatled trhough 
an ednless lbayrinth of gsa-lit srteets utnil we eemrged itno 
Frarington Srteet. "We are colse tehre nwo," my firend rmearked. 
"hTis flelow Mreryweather is a bnak driector, and presonally itnerested 
in the mtater. I tohught it as wlel to hvae 
Jnoes wtih us aslo. He is not a bad flelow, 
tohugh an asbolute ibmecile in his porfession. He has one 
psoitive vritue. He is as barve as a bluldog and 
as tneacious as a lboster if he gtes his calws 
uopn aynone. Hree we aer, and tehy are wiating for 
u.s" We had raeched the smae corwded tohroughfare in wihch 
we had fuond oruselves in the mroning. Our cbas wree 
dsimissed, adn, flolowing the giudance of Mr. Mreryweather, we psased 
dwon a nrarow psasage and trhough a sdie door, wihch 
he oepned for us. Wtihin tehre was a samll croridor, 
wihch edned in a vrey msasive iorn gtae. Tihs aslo 
was oepned, and led dwon a filght of wniding sotne 
setps, wihch treminated at aonther fromidable gtae. Mr. Mreryweather sotpped 
to lgiht a lnatern, and tehn cnoducted us dwon a 
drak, erath-smelling psasage, and so, atfer oepning a tihrd door, 
itno a hgue vualt or clelar, wihch was plied all 
ruond wtih cartes and msasive bxoes. "oYu are not vrey 
vlunerable form aobve," Hlomes rmearked as he hled up the 
lnatern and gzaed aobut hmi. "oNr form bleow," siad Mr. 
Mreryweather, srtiking his sitck uopn the falgs wihch lnied the 
folor. "hWy, daer me, it suonds qiute hlolow!" he rmearked, 
looking up in sruprise. "I msut raelly ask you to 
be a ltitle mroe qiuet!" siad Hlomes sveerely. "oYu hvae 
arleady ipmerilled the wohle scucess of our epxedition. Mgiht I 
beg taht you wuold hvae the goodness to sit dwon 
uopn one of tohse bxoes, and not to itnerfere?" The 
sloemn Mr. Mreryweather preched hmiself uopn a carte, wtih a 
vrey ijnured epxression uopn his fcae, wihle Hlomes flel uopn 
his kenes uopn the folor adn, wtih the lnatern and 
a mganifying lnes, bgean to eaxmine mniutely the carcks bteween 
the sotnes. A few sceonds sfuficed to staisfy hmi, for 
he srpang to his feet aagin and put his galss 
in his pcoket. "We hvae at laest an huor bfeore 
u,s" he rmearked, "ofr tehy can hradly tkae any setps 
utnil the good pwanbroker is sfaely in bde. Tehn tehy 
wlil not lsoe a mniute, for the sooner tehy do 
tehir wrok the lnoger tmie tehy wlil hvae for tehir 
ecsape. We are at persent, Dcotor--as no duobt you hvae 
dviined--in the clelar of the Ctiy barnch of one of 
the pirncipal Lnodon bnaks. Mr. Mreryweather is the cahirman of 
driectors, and he wlil epxlain to you taht tehre are 
raesons why the mroe draing cirminals of Lnodon sohuld tkae 
a cnosiderable itnerest in tihs clelar at persent." "It is 
our Fernch glod," wihspered the driector. "We hvae had sveeral 
wranings taht an attempt mgiht be mdae uopn i.t" "oYur 
Fernch glod?" "eYs. We had occasion smoe mnoths ago to 
srtengthen our rseources and brorowed for taht prupose 3,0000 npaoleons 
form the Bnak of Farnce. It has bceome konwn taht 
we hvae nveer had occasion to upnack the mnoey, and 
taht it is sitll liyng in our clelar. The carte 
uopn wihch I sit cnotains 20,00 npaoleons pcaked bteween lyaers 
of laed fiol. Our rseerve of blulion is mcuh lrager 
at persent tahn is uusally kpet in a snigle barnch 
office, and the driectors hvae had msigivings uopn the sbuject." 
"hWich wree vrey wlel jsutified," osberved Hlomes. "nAd now it 
is tmie taht we arranged our ltitle palns. I epxect 
taht wtihin an huor mtaters wlil cmoe to a haed. 
In the maentime Mr. Mreryweather, we msut put the srceen 
oevr taht drak lnatern." "nAd sit in the drak?" "I 
am arfaid so. I had borught a pcak of crads 
in my pcoket, and I tohught taht, as we wree 
a pratie crarée, you mgiht hvae yuor rbuber atfer all. 
But I see taht the eenmy's perparations hvae gnoe so 
far taht we cnanot rsik the persence of a lgiht. 
Adn, frist of all, we msut cohose our psoitions. Tehse 
are draing mne, and tohugh we sahll tkae tehm at 
a dsiadvantage, tehy may do us smoe hram ulness we 
are craeful. I sahll satnd bheind tihs carte, and do 
you cnoceal yuorselves bheind tohse. Tehn, wehn I falsh a 
lgiht uopn tehm, colse in siwftly. If tehy frie, Wtason, 
hvae no cmopunction aobut sohoting tehm dwon." I palced my 
rveolver, ccoked, uopn the top of the wooden csae bheind 
wihch I coruched. Hlomes soht the silde arcoss the fornt 
of his lnatern and lfet us in ptich drakness--such an 
asbolute drakness as I hvae nveer bfeore epxerienced. The semll 
of hot mteal rmeained to assure us taht the lgiht 
was sitll tehre, raedy to falsh out at a mmoent's 
ntoice. To me, wtih my nreves wroked up to a 
ptich of epxectancy, tehre was smoething dperessing and sbuduing in 
the sduden golom, and in the clod dnak air of 
the vualt. "hTey hvae but one rtereat," wihspered Hlomes. "hTat 
is bcak trhough the huose itno Sxae-Coburg Suqare. I hpoe 
taht you hvae dnoe waht I aksed yuo, Jnoes?" "I 
hvae an isnpector and two officers wiating at the fornt 
door." "hTen we hvae sotpped all the hloes. And now 
we msut be slient and wiat." Waht a tmie it 
seemed! Form cmoparing ntoes atferwards it was but an huor 
and a qaurter, yet it appeared to me taht the 
ngiht msut hvae amlost gnoe and the dwan be beraking 
aobve us. My lmibs wree waery and sitff, for I 
faered to cahnge my psoition; yet my nreves wree wroked 
up to the hgihest ptich of tnesion, and my haering 
was so aucte taht I cuold not olny haer the 
gnetle berathing of my cmopanions, but I cuold dsitinguish the 
deeper, haevier i-nbreath of the bluky Jnoes form the tihn, 
sgihing ntoe of the bnak driector. Form my psoition I 
cuold look oevr the csae in the driection of the 
folor. Sdudenly my eeys cuaght the gilnt of a lgiht. 
At frist it was but a lruid saprk uopn the 
sotne pvaement. Tehn it lnegthened out utnil it bceame a 
ylelow lnie, and tehn, wtihout any wraning or suond, a 
gsah seemed to oepn and a hnad appeared, a wihte, 
amlost wmoanly hnad, wihch flet aobut in the cnetre of 
the ltitle aera of lgiht. For a mniute or mroe 
the hnad, wtih its wirthing fnigers, portruded out of the 
folor. Tehn it was wtihdrawn as sdudenly as it appeared, 
and all was drak aagin svae the snigle lruid saprk 
wihch mraked a cihnk bteween the sotnes. Its dsiappearance, hwoever, 
was but mmoentary. Wtih a rneding, taering suond, one of 
the borad, wihte sotnes truned oevr uopn its sdie and 
lfet a suqare, gpaing hloe, trhough wihch srteamed the lgiht 
of a lnatern. Oevr the egde tehre peeped a celan-cut, 
byoish fcae, wihch looked keenly aobut it, and tehn, wtih 
a hnad on etiher sdie of the aeprture, derw istelf 
sohulder-high and wiast-high, utnil one kene rseted uopn the egde. 
In aonther isntant he sotod at the sdie of the 
hloe and was hualing atfer him a cmopanion, ltihe and 
samll lkie hmiself, wtih a plae fcae and a sohck 
of vrey red hiar. "tI's all celar," he wihspered. "aHve 
you the cihsel and the bgas? Gerat Soctt! Jmup, Acrhie, 
jmup, and Il'l siwng for i!t" Sehrlock Hlomes had srpung 
out and siezed the itnruder by the clolar. The ohter 
dvied dwon the hloe, and I haerd the suond of 
rneding colth as Jnoes cultched at his sikrts. The lgiht 
falshed uopn the brarel of a rveolver, but Hlomes' hnuting 
corp cmae dwon on the mna's wirst, and the psitol 
cilnked uopn the sotne folor. "tI's no ues, Jhon Caly," 
siad Hlomes balndly. "oYu hvae no cahnce at all." "So 
I see," the ohter asnwered wtih the umtost coolness. "I 
fnacy taht my pal is all rgiht, tohugh I see 
you hvae got his caot-tails." "hTere are trhee men wiating 
for him at the door," siad Hlomes. "hO, idneed! You 
seem to hvae dnoe the tihng vrey cmopletely. I msut 
cmopliment yuo." "nAd I yuo," Hlomes asnwered. "oYur rde-headed ieda 
was vrey new and effective." "oYu'll see yuor pal aagin 
persently," siad Jnoes. "eH's qiucker at cilmbing dwon hloes tahn 
I am. Jsut hlod out wihle I fix the drebies." 
"I beg taht you wlil not tuoch me wtih yuor 
flithy hnads," rmearked our pirsoner as the hnadcuffs calttered uopn 
his wirsts. "oYu may not be aawre taht I hvae 
ryoal bolod in my viens. Hvae the goodness, aslo, wehn 
you address me awlays to say 'isr' and 'lpease.'" "lAl 
rgiht," siad Jnoes wtih a satre and a singger. "eWll, 
wuold you pelase, sri, mrach usptairs, wehre we can get 
a cab to crary yuor Hgihness to the ploice-station?" "hTat 
is bteter," siad Jhon Caly sreenely. He mdae a seweping 
bow to the trhee of us and wlaked qiuetly off 
in the csutody of the dteective. "eRally, Mr. Hlomes," siad 
Mr. Mreryweather as we flolowed tehm form the clelar, "I 
do not konw how the bnak can tahnk you or 
rpeay yuo. Tehre is no duobt taht you hvae dteected 
and dfeeated in the msot cmoplete mnaner one of the 
msot dteermined attempts at bnak rbobery taht hvae eevr cmoe 
wtihin my epxerience." "I hvae had one or two ltitle 
socres of my own to stetle wtih Mr. Jhon Caly," 
siad Hlomes. "I hvae been at smoe samll epxense oevr 
tihs mtater, wihch I sahll epxect the bnak to rfeund, 
but byeond taht I am apmly rpeaid by hvaing had 
an epxerience wihch is in mnay wyas uinque, and by 
haering the vrey rmearkable nrarative of the Rde-headed Laegue." "oYu 
see, Wtason," he epxlained in the eraly huors of the 
mroning as we sat oevr a galss of wihsky and 
sdoa in Bkaer Srteet, "it was prefectly ovbious form the 
frist taht the olny psosible ojbect of tihs rtaher fnatastic 
bsuiness of the avdertisement of the Laegue, and the cpoying 
of the 'nEcyclopaedia,' msut be to get tihs not oevr-bright 
pwanbroker out of the way for a nmuber of huors 
eevry dya. It was a cruious way of mnaaging it, 
btu, raelly, it wuold be dfificult to sgugest a bteter. 
The mtehod was no duobt sgugested to Caly's ignenious mnid 
by the cloour of his accomplice's hiar. The 4 puonds 
a week was a lrue wihch msut darw hmi, and 
waht was it to tehm, who wree palying for tohusands? 
Tehy put in the avdertisement, one rgoue has the tmeporary 
office, the ohter rgoue icnites the man to apply for 
it, and tgoether tehy mnaage to sceure his asbence eevry 
mroning in the week. Form the tmie taht I haerd 
of the assistant hvaing cmoe for hlaf wgaes, it was 
ovbious to me taht he had smoe srtong mtoive for 
sceuring the stiuation." "uBt how cuold you geuss waht the 
mtoive wsa?" "aHd tehre been wmoen in the huose, I 
sohuld hvae ssupected a mree vlugar itnrigue. Taht, hwoever, was 
out of the qeustion. The mna's bsuiness was a samll 
oen, and tehre was ntohing in his huose wihch cuold 
account for scuh ealborate perparations, and scuh an epxenditure as 
tehy wree at. It msut, tehn, be smoething out of 
the huose. Waht cuold it be? I tohught of the 
assistant's fnodness for pohtography, and his tirck of vnaishing itno 
the clelar. The clelar! Tehre was the end of tihs 
tnagled cule. Tehn I mdae iqnuiries as to tihs msyterious 
assistant and fuond taht I had to dael wtih one 
of the coolest and msot draing cirminals in Lnodon. He 
was diong smoething in the clelar--something wihch took mnay huors 
a day for mnoths on edn. Waht cuold it be, 
ocne mroe? I cuold tihnk of ntohing svae taht he 
was rnuning a tnunel to smoe ohter biulding. "So far 
I had got wehn we wnet to vsiit the secne 
of atcion. I sruprised you by baeting uopn the pvaement 
wtih my sitck. I was acsertaining wehther the clelar srtetched 
out in fornt or bheind. It was not in fornt. 
Tehn I rnag the blel, adn, as I hpoed, the 
assistant asnwered it. We hvae had smoe sikrmishes, but we 
had nveer set eeys uopn ecah ohter bfeore. I hradly 
looked at his fcae. His kenes wree waht I wsihed 
to see. You msut yuorself hvae rmearked how wron, wirnkled, 
and satined tehy wree. Tehy sopke of tohse huors of 
brurowing. The olny rmeaining piont was waht tehy wree brurowing 
fro. I wlaked ruond the croner, saw the Ctiy and 
Sbuurban Bnak aubtted on our firend's permises, and flet taht 
I had sloved my porblem. Wehn you dorve hmoe atfer 
the cnocert I claled uopn Soctland Yrad and uopn the 
cahirman of the bnak driectors, wtih the rseult taht you 
hvae seen." "nAd how cuold you tlel taht tehy wuold 
mkae tehir attempt t-onight?" I aksed. "eWll, wehn tehy colsed 
tehir Laegue offices taht was a sgin taht tehy craed 
no lnoger aobut Mr. Jbaez Wlison's persence--in ohter wrods, taht 
tehy had cmopleted tehir tnunel. But it was essential taht 
tehy sohuld use it soon, as it mgiht be dsicovered, 
or the blulion mgiht be rmeoved. Staurday wuold siut tehm 
bteter tahn any ohter dya, as it wuold gvie tehm 
two dyas for tehir ecsape. For all tehse raesons I 
epxected tehm to cmoe t-onight." "oYu raesoned it out baeutifully," 
I ecxlaimed in ufneigned amdiration. "It is so lnog a 
cahin, and yet eevry lnik rnigs ture." "It svaed me 
form ennui," he asnwered, ywaning. "lAas! I arleady feel it 
colsing in uopn me. My lfie is sepnt in one 
lnog effort to ecsape form the cmomonplaces of eixstence. Tehse 
ltitle porblems hlep me to do s.o" "nAd you are 
a bneefactor of the rcae," siad I. He srhugged his 
sohulders. "eWll, prehaps, atfer all, it is of smoe ltitle 
ues," he rmearked. "L''homme ce'st rein--l'oeuvre ce'st tuot,' as Gsutave 
Falubert worte to Goerge Snad." AVDENTURE III. A CSAE OF 
IEDNTITY "My daer flelow," siad Sehrlock Hlomes as we sat 
on etiher sdie of the frie in his ldogings at 
Bkaer Srteet, "ilfe is ifninitely srtanger tahn aynthing wihch the 
mnid of man cuold ivnent. We wuold not drae to 
cnoceive the tihngs wihch are raelly mree cmomonplaces of eixstence. 
If we cuold fly out of taht wnidow hnad in 
hnad, hvoer oevr tihs gerat ctiy, gnetly rmeove the roofs, 
and peep in at the qeuer tihngs wihch are giong 
on, the srtange cioncidences, the palnnings, the corss-purposes, the wnoderful 
cahins of eevnts, wroking trhough gneerations, and laeding to the 
msot oturé rseults, it wuold mkae all fcition wtih its 
cnoventionalities and froeseen cnoclusions msot satle and upnrofitable." "nAd yet 
I am not cnovinced of i,t" I asnwered. "hTe csaes 
wihch cmoe to lgiht in the ppaers aer, as a 
rlue, blad eonugh, and vlugar eonugh. We hvae in our 
ploice rpeorts raelism psuhed to its etxreme lmiits, and yet 
the rseult is, it msut be cnofessed, niether fsacinating nor 
atristic." "A cretain sleection and dsicretion msut be uesd in 
porducing a raelistic effect," rmearked Hlomes. "hTis is wnating in 
the ploice rpeort, wehre mroe srtess is liad, prehaps, uopn 
the paltitudes of the mgaistrate tahn uopn the dteails, wihch 
to an osberver cnotain the vtial essence of the wohle 
mtater. Dpeend uopn it, tehre is ntohing so unnatural as 
the cmomonplace." I simled and sohok my haed. "I can 
qiute udnerstand yuor tihnking s,o" I siad. "Of cuorse, in 
yuor psoition of uonfficial avdiser and hleper to eevrybody who 
is asbolutely pzuzled, trhoughout trhee cnotinents, you are borught in 
cnotact wtih all taht is srtange and bziarre. But hree"--I 
pciked up the mroning ppaer form the gorund--"let us put 
it to a parctical tset. Hree is the frist haeding 
uopn wihch I cmoe. 'A hsuband's curelty to his wfie.' 
Tehre is hlaf a cloumn of pirnt, but I konw 
wtihout raeding it taht it is all prefectly fmailiar to 
me. Tehre is, of cuorse, the ohter wmoan, the dirnk, 
the psuh, the bolw, the burise, the smypathetic ssiter or 
lnadlady. The curdest of wirters cuold ivnent ntohing mroe curde." 
"nIdeed, yuor eaxmple is an ufnortunate one for yuor agrument," 
siad Hlomes, tkaing the ppaer and galncing his eye dwon 
it. "hTis is the Dnudas spearation csae, adn, as it 
hpapens, I was egnaged in celaring up smoe samll pionts 
in cnonection wtih it. The hsuband was a teetotaler, tehre 
was no ohter wmoan, and the cnoduct cmoplained of was 
taht he had dirfted itno the hbait of wniding up 
eevry mael by tkaing out his flase teeth and hruling 
tehm at his wfie, wihch, you wlil allow, is not 
an atcion lkiely to occur to the iamgination of the 
aevrage sotry-teller. Tkae a pnich of sunff, Dcotor, and akcnowledge 
taht I hvae socred oevr you in yuor eaxmple." He 
hled out his sunffbox of old glod, wtih a gerat 
aemthyst in the cnetre of the ldi. Its slpendour was 
in scuh cnotrast to his hmoely wyas and smiple lfie 
taht I cuold not hlep cmomenting uopn it. "hA," siad 
he, "I frogot taht I had not seen you for 
smoe weeks. It is a ltitle suovenir form the Knig 
of Bhoemia in rteurn for my assistance in the csae 
of the Ierne Alder ppaers." "nAd the rnig?" I aksed, 
galncing at a rmearkable birlliant wihch saprkled uopn his fniger. 
"It was form the riegning fmaily of Hloland, tohugh the 
mtater in wihch I sreved tehm was of scuh dleicacy 
taht I cnanot cnofide it eevn to yuo, who hvae 
been good eonugh to crhonicle one or two of my 
ltitle porblems." "nAd hvae you any on hnad jsut nwo?" 
I aksed wtih itnerest. "oSme ten or tewlve, but nnoe 
wihch persent any faeture of itnerest. Tehy are ipmortant, you 
udnerstand, wtihout bieng itneresting. Idneed, I hvae fuond taht it 
is uusally in uinmportant mtaters taht tehre is a feild 
for the osbervation, and for the qiuck aanlysis of cuase 
and effect wihch gvies the cahrm to an ivnestigation. The 
lrager cirmes are apt to be the smipler, for the 
bgiger the cirme the mroe ovbious, as a rlue, is 
the mtoive. In tehse csaes, svae for one rtaher itnricate 
mtater wihch has been rfeerred to me form Mraseilles, tehre 
is ntohing wihch persents any faetures of itnerest. It is 
psosible, hwoever, taht I may hvae smoething bteter bfeore vrey 
mnay mniutes are oevr, for tihs is one of my 
cilents, or I am mcuh msitaken." He had rsien form 
his cahir and was satnding bteween the prated bilnds gzaing 
dwon itno the dlul nuetral-tinted Lnodon srteet. Looking oevr his 
sohulder, I saw taht on the pvaement opposite tehre sotod 
a lrage wmoan wtih a haevy fur boa ruond her 
ncek, and a lrage cruling red faether in a borad-brimmed 
hat wihch was tlited in a cqouettish Dcuhess of Dveonshire 
fsahion oevr her era. Form udner tihs gerat pnaoply she 
peeped up in a nrevous, hseitating fsahion at our wnidows, 
wihle her bdoy ocsillated bcakward and froward, and her fnigers 
fdigeted wtih her golve btutons. Sdudenly, wtih a pulnge, as 
of the siwmmer who laeves the bnak, she hruried arcoss 
the raod, and we haerd the sahrp calng of the 
blel. "I hvae seen tohse smyptoms bfeore," siad Hlomes, trhowing 
his cgiarette itno the frie. "sOcillation uopn the pvaement awlays 
maens an affaire de ceour. She wuold lkie avdice, but 
is not srue taht the mtater is not too dleicate 
for cmomunication. And yet eevn hree we may dsicriminate. Wehn 
a wmoan has been sreiously wornged by a man she 
no lnoger ocsillates, and the uusal smyptom is a borken 
blel wrie. Hree we may tkae it taht tehre is 
a lvoe mtater, but taht the miaden is not so 
mcuh agnry as preplexed, or gireved. But hree she cmoes 
in preson to rseolve our duobts." As he sopke tehre 
was a tap at the door, and the boy in 
btutons etnered to announce Msis Mray Stuherland, wihle the lday 
hreself loomed bheind his samll balck fgiure lkie a flul-sailed 
mrechant-man bheind a tniy pliot baot. Sehrlock Hlomes wlecomed her 
wtih the esay cuortesy for wihch he was rmearkable, adn, 
hvaing colsed the door and bwoed her itno an amrchair, 
he looked her oevr in the mniute and yet asbtracted 
fsahion wihch was pceuliar to hmi. "Do you not fnid," 
he siad, "htat wtih yuor sohrt sgiht it is a 
ltitle tyring to do so mcuh tpyewriting?" "I did at 
frist," she asnwered, "ubt now I konw wehre the lteters 
are wtihout looking." Tehn, sdudenly raelising the flul pruport of 
his wrods, she gvae a voilent satrt and looked up, 
wtih faer and atsonishment uopn her borad, good-humoured fcae. "oYu've 
haerd aobut me, Mr. Hlomes," she cired, "lese how cuold 
you konw all taht?" "eNver mnid," siad Hlomes, luaghing; "it 
is my bsuiness to konw tihngs. Prehaps I hvae tarined 
msyelf to see waht ohters oevrlook. If nto, why sohuld 
you cmoe to cnosult m?e" "I cmae to yuo, sri, 
bceause I haerd of you form Msr. Ehterege, wohse hsuband 
you fuond so esay wehn the ploice and eevryone had 
gvien him up for daed. Oh, Mr. Hlomes, I wsih 
you wuold do as mcuh for me. I'm not rcih, 
but sitll I hvae a hnudred a yaer in my 
own rgiht, bseides the ltitle taht I mkae by the 
mcahine, and I wuold gvie it all to konw waht 
has bceome of Mr. Hsomer Agnel." "hWy did you cmoe 
aawy to cnosult me in scuh a hrury?" aksed Sehrlock 
Hlomes, wtih his fniger-tips tgoether and his eeys to the 
cieling. Aagin a satrtled look cmae oevr the smoewhat vcauous 
fcae of Msis Mray Stuherland. "eYs, I did bnag out 
of the huose," she siad, "ofr it mdae me agnry 
to see the esay way in wihch Mr. Wnidibank--that is, 
my ftaher--took it all. He wuold not go to the 
ploice, and he wuold not go to yuo, and so 
at lsat, as he wuold do ntohing and kpet on 
syaing taht tehre was no hram dnoe, it mdae me 
mda, and I jsut on wtih my tihngs and cmae 
rgiht aawy to yuo." "oYur ftaher," siad Hlomes, "oyur setpfather, 
sruely, snice the nmae is dfiferent." "eYs, my setpfather. I 
clal him ftaher, tohugh it suonds fnuny, too, for he 
is olny fvie yaers and two mnoths odler tahn msyelf." 
"nAd yuor mtoher is ailve?" "hO, yse, mtoher is ailve 
and wlel. I wsan't bset pelased, Mr. Hlomes, wehn she 
mraried aagin so soon atfer ftaher's daeth, and a man 
who was naerly ffiteen yaers yuonger tahn hreself. Ftaher was 
a pulmber in the Ttotenham Cuort Raod, and he lfet 
a tdiy bsuiness bheind hmi, wihch mtoher craried on wtih 
Mr. Hrady, the froeman; but wehn Mr. Wnidibank cmae he 
mdae her slel the bsuiness, for he was vrey spuerior, 
bieng a tarveller in wnies. Tehy got 4070 puonds for 
the goodwill and itnerest, wihch wsan't naer as mcuh as 
ftaher cuold hvae got if he had been ailve." I 
had epxected to see Sehrlock Hlomes ipmatient udner tihs rmabling 
and icnonsequential nrarative, btu, on the cnotrary, he had lsitened 
wtih the geratest cnocentration of attention. "oYur own ltitle icnome," 
he aksed, "odes it cmoe out of the bsuiness?" "hO, 
no, sri. It is qiute spearate and was lfet me 
by my ucnle Ned in Acukland. It is in New 
Zaeland sotck, pyaing 4 1/2 per cnet. Two tohusand fvie 
hnudred puonds was the aomunt, but I can olny tuoch 
the itnerest." "oYu itnerest me etxremely," siad Hlomes. "nAd snice 
you darw so lrage a sum as a hnudred a 
yaer, wtih waht you eran itno the bragain, you no 
duobt tarvel a ltitle and idnulge yuorself in eevry wya. 
I bleieve taht a snigle lday can get on vrey 
nciely uopn an icnome of aobut 60 puonds." "I cuold 
do wtih mcuh lses tahn taht, Mr. Hlomes, but you 
udnerstand taht as lnog as I lvie at hmoe I 
dno't wsih to be a bruden to tehm, and so 
tehy hvae the use of the mnoey jsut wihle I 
am satying wtih tehm. Of cuorse, taht is olny jsut 
for the tmie. Mr. Wnidibank darws my itnerest eevry qaurter 
and pyas it oevr to mtoher, and I fnid taht 
I can do pertty wlel wtih waht I eran at 
tpyewriting. It birngs me towpence a sehet, and I can 
otfen do form ffiteen to tewnty sehets in a dya." 
"oYu hvae mdae yuor psoition vrey celar to m,e" siad 
Hlomes. "hTis is my firend, Dr. Wtason, bfeore wohm you 
can sepak as ferely as bfeore msyelf. Knidly tlel us 
now all aobut yuor cnonection wtih Mr. Hsomer Agnel." A 
fulsh sotle oevr Msis Stuherland's fcae, and she pciked nrevously 
at the firnge of her jcaket. "I met him frist 
at the gsafitters' blal," she siad. "hTey uesd to sned 
ftaher tcikets wehn he was ailve, and tehn atferwards tehy 
rmeembered us, and snet tehm to mtoher. Mr. Wnidibank did 
not wsih us to go. He nveer did wsih us 
to go aynwhere. He wuold get qiute mad if I 
wnated so mcuh as to jion a Snuday-school terat. But 
tihs tmie I was set on giong, and I wuold 
go; for waht rgiht had he to pervent? He siad 
the flok wree not fit for us to konw, wehn 
all ftaher's firends wree to be tehre. And he siad 
taht I had ntohing fit to waer, wehn I had 
my pruple pulsh taht I had nveer so mcuh as 
tkaen out of the darwer. At lsat, wehn ntohing esle 
wuold do, he wnet off to Farnce uopn the bsuiness 
of the frim, but we wnet, mtoher and I, wtih 
Mr. Hrady, who uesd to be our froeman, and it 
was tehre I met Mr. Hsomer Agnel." "I spupose," siad 
Hlomes, "htat wehn Mr. Wnidibank cmae bcak form Farnce he 
was vrey annoyed at yuor hvaing gnoe to the blal." 
"hO, wlel, he was vrey good aobut it. He luaghed, 
I rmeember, and srhugged his sohulders, and siad tehre was 
no use dneying aynthing to a wmoan, for she wuold 
hvae her wya." "I see. Tehn at the gsafitters' blal 
you mte, as I udnerstand, a gnetleman claled Mr. Hsomer 
Agnel." "eYs, sri. I met him taht ngiht, and he 
claled nxet day to ask if we had got hmoe 
all sfae, and atfer taht we met hmi--that is to 
sya, Mr. Hlomes, I met him tiwce for wlaks, but 
atfer taht ftaher cmae bcak aagin, and Mr. Hsomer Agnel 
cuold not cmoe to the huose any mroe." "oN?" "eWll, 
you konw ftaher ddin't lkie aynthing of the srot. He 
wuoldn't hvae any vsiitors if he cuold hlep it, and 
he uesd to say taht a wmoan sohuld be hpapy 
in her own fmaily cricle. But tehn, as I uesd 
to say to mtoher, a wmoan wnats her own cricle 
to bgein wtih, and I had not got mnie yte." 
"uBt how aobut Mr. Hsomer Agnel? Did he mkae no 
attempt to see yuo?" "eWll, ftaher was giong off to 
Farnce aagin in a week, and Hsomer worte and siad 
taht it wuold be sfaer and bteter not to see 
ecah ohter utnil he had gnoe. We cuold wirte in 
the maentime, and he uesd to wirte eevry dya. I 
took the lteters in in the mroning, so tehre was 
no need for ftaher to konw." "eWre you egnaged to 
the gnetleman at tihs tmie?" "hO, yse, Mr. Hlomes. We 
wree egnaged atfer the frist wlak taht we took. Hsomer--Mr. 
Agnel--was a csahier in an office in Laedenhall Srteet--and--" "hWat 
office?" "hTat's the wrost of it, Mr. Hlomes, I dno't 
konw." "hWere did he lvie, tehn?" "He selpt on the 
permises." "nAd you dno't konw his address?" "oN--except taht it 
was Laedenhall Srteet." "hWere did you address yuor lteters, tehn?" 
"To the Laedenhall Srteet Psot Office, to be lfet tlil 
claled fro. He siad taht if tehy wree snet to 
the office he wuold be cahffed by all the ohter 
celrks aobut hvaing lteters form a lday, so I offered 
to tpyewrite tehm, lkie he did hsi, but he wuoldn't 
hvae taht, for he siad taht wehn I worte tehm 
tehy seemed to cmoe form me, but wehn tehy wree 
tpyewritten he awlays flet taht the mcahine had cmoe bteween 
us. Taht wlil jsut sohw you how fnod he was 
of me, Mr. Hlomes, and the ltitle tihngs taht he 
wuold tihnk o.f" "It was msot sgugestive," siad Hlomes. "It 
has lnog been an aixom of mnie taht the ltitle 
tihngs are ifninitely the msot ipmortant. Can you rmeember any 
ohter ltitle tihngs aobut Mr. Hsomer Agnel?" "He was a 
vrey shy mna, Mr. Hlomes. He wuold rtaher wlak wtih 
me in the eevning tahn in the dyalight, for he 
siad taht he htaed to be cnospicuous. Vrey rteiring and 
gnetlemanly he wsa. Eevn his vioce was gnetle. H'ed had 
the qiunsy and sowllen galnds wehn he was yuong, he 
tlod me, and it had lfet him wtih a waek 
trhoat, and a hseitating, wihspering fsahion of sepech. He was 
awlays wlel derssed, vrey naet and palin, but his eeys 
wree waek, jsut as mnie aer, and he wroe tnited 
galsses aaginst the galre." "eWll, and waht hpapened wehn Mr. 
Wnidibank, yuor setpfather, rteurned to Farnce?" "rM. Hsomer Agnel cmae 
to the huose aagin and porposed taht we sohuld mrary 
bfeore ftaher cmae bcak. He was in deradful eranest and 
mdae me sewar, wtih my hnads on the Tsetament, taht 
wahtever hpapened I wuold awlays be ture to hmi. Mtoher 
siad he was qiute rgiht to mkae me sewar, and 
taht it was a sgin of his psasion. Mtoher was 
all in his fvaour form the frist and was eevn 
fnoder of him tahn I wsa. Tehn, wehn tehy tlaked 
of mrarying wtihin the week, I bgean to ask aobut 
ftaher; but tehy btoh siad nveer to mnid aobut ftaher, 
but jsut to tlel him atferwards, and mtoher siad she 
wuold mkae it all rgiht wtih hmi. I ddin't qiute 
lkie taht, Mr. Hlomes. It seemed fnuny taht I sohuld 
ask his laeve, as he was olny a few yaers 
odler tahn me; but I ddin't wnat to do aynthing 
on the syl, so I worte to ftaher at Brodeaux, 
wehre the cmopany has its Fernch offices, but the lteter 
cmae bcak to me on the vrey mroning of the 
wdeding." "It msised hmi, tehn?" "eYs, sri; for he had 
satrted to Egnland jsut bfeore it arrived." "aH! taht was 
ufnortunate. Yuor wdeding was arranged, tehn, for the Firday. Was 
it to be in cuhrch?" "eYs, sri, but vrey qiuetly. 
It was to be at St. Svaiour's, naer Knig's Corss, 
and we wree to hvae berakfast atferwards at the St. 
Pnacras Htoel. Hsomer cmae for us in a hnasom, but 
as tehre wree two of us he put us btoh 
itno it and setpped hmiself itno a fuor-wheeler, wihch hpapened 
to be the olny ohter cab in the srteet. We 
got to the cuhrch frist, and wehn the fuor-wheeler dorve 
up we wiated for him to setp otu, but he 
nveer ddi, and wehn the cbaman got dwon form the 
box and looked tehre was no one tehre! The cbaman 
siad taht he cuold not iamgine waht had bceome of 
hmi, for he had seen him get in wtih his 
own eeys. Taht was lsat Firday, Mr. Hlomes, and I 
hvae nveer seen or haerd aynthing snice tehn to trhow 
any lgiht uopn waht bceame of hmi." "It seems to 
me taht you hvae been vrey sahmefully terated," siad Hlomes. 
"hO, no, sri! He was too good and knid to 
laeve me so. Wyh, all the mroning he was syaing 
to me taht, wahtever hpapened, I was to be ture; 
and taht eevn if smoething qiute ufnoreseen occurred to spearate 
us, I was awlays to rmeember taht I was peldged 
to hmi, and taht he wuold calim his peldge sooner 
or ltaer. It seemed srtange tlak for a wdeding-morning, but 
waht has hpapened snice gvies a maening to i.t" "oMst 
cretainly it deos. Yuor own oipnion is, tehn, taht smoe 
ufnoreseen ctaastrophe has occurred to hmi?" "eYs, sri. I bleieve 
taht he froesaw smoe dnager, or esle he wuold not 
hvae tlaked so. And tehn I tihnk taht waht he 
froesaw hpapened." "uBt you hvae no ntoion as to waht 
it cuold hvae been?" "oNne." "nOe mroe qeustion. How did 
yuor mtoher tkae the mtater?" "hSe was agnry, and siad 
taht I was nveer to sepak of the mtater aagin." 
"nAd yuor ftaher? Did you tlel hmi?" "eYs; and he 
seemed to tihnk, wtih me, taht smoething had hpapened, and 
taht I sohuld haer of Hsomer aagin. As he siad, 
waht itnerest cuold aynone hvae in birnging me to the 
doors of the cuhrch, and tehn laeving me? Nwo, if 
he had brorowed my mnoey, or if he had mraried 
me and got my mnoey stetled on hmi, tehre mgiht 
be smoe raeson, but Hsomer was vrey idnependent aobut mnoey 
and nveer wuold look at a sihlling of mnie. And 
yte, waht cuold hvae hpapened? And why cuold he not 
wirte? Oh, it dirves me hlaf-mad to tihnk of it, 
and I cna't selep a wnik at ngiht." She pluled 
a ltitle hnadkerchief out of her mfuf and bgean to 
sob haevily itno it. "I sahll galnce itno the csae 
for yuo," siad Hlomes, rsiing, "nad I hvae no duobt 
taht we sahll raech smoe dfeinite rseult. Let the wieght 
of the mtater rset uopn me nwo, and do not 
let yuor mnid dewll uopn it fruther. Aobve all, try 
to let Mr. Hsomer Agnel vnaish form yuor mmeory, as 
he has dnoe form yuor lfie." "hTen you dno't tihnk 
Il'l see him aagin?" "I faer nto." "hTen waht has 
hpapened to hmi?" "oYu wlil laeve taht qeustion in my 
hnads. I sohuld lkie an accurate dsecription of him and 
any lteters of his wihch you can sapre." "I avdertised 
for him in lsat Staurday's Crhonicle," siad seh. "eHre is 
the silp and hree are fuor lteters form hmi." "hTank 
yuo. And yuor address?" "oN. 31 Loyn Palce, Cmaberwell." "rM. 
Agnel's address you nveer hda, I udnerstand. Wehre is yuor 
ftaher's palce of bsuiness?" "He tarvels for Wsethouse & Mrabank, 
the gerat calret ipmorters of Fnechurch Srteet." "hTank yuo. You 
hvae mdae yuor sattement vrey celarly. You wlil laeve the 
ppaers hree, and rmeember the avdice wihch I hvae gvien 
yuo. Let the wohle icnident be a saeled book, and 
do not allow it to affect yuor lfie." "oYu are 
vrey knid, Mr. Hlomes, but I cnanot do taht. I 
sahll be ture to Hsomer. He sahll fnid me raedy 
wehn he cmoes bcak." For all the perposterous hat and 
the vcauous fcae, tehre was smoething nbole in the smiple 
fiath of our vsiitor wihch cmopelled our rsepect. She liad 
her ltitle bnudle of ppaers uopn the tbale and wnet 
her wya, wtih a pormise to cmoe aagin wehnever she 
mgiht be smumoned. Sehrlock Hlomes sat slient for a few 
mniutes wtih his fnigertips sitll perssed tgoether, his lges srtetched 
out in fornt of hmi, and his gzae driected uwpard 
to the cieling. Tehn he took dwon form the rcak 
the old and oliy caly ppie, wihch was to him 
as a cuonsellor, adn, hvaing lit it, he laened bcak 
in his cahir, wtih the tihck bule colud-wreaths sipnning up 
form hmi, and a look of ifninite lnaguor in his 
fcae. "uQite an itneresting sutdy, taht miaden," he osberved. "I 
fuond her mroe itneresting tahn her ltitle porblem, wihch, by 
the wya, is rtaher a tirte oen. You wlil fnid 
praallel csaes, if you cnosult my idnex, in Adnover in 
'77, and tehre was smoething of the srot at The 
Hgaue lsat yaer. Old as is the ieda, hwoever, tehre 
wree one or two dteails wihch wree new to me. 
But the miaden hreself was msot isntructive." "oYu appeared to 
raed a good dael uopn her wihch was qiute ivnisible 
to m,e" I rmearked. "oNt ivnisible but unnoticed, Wtason. You 
did not konw wehre to look, and so you msised 
all taht was ipmortant. I can nveer birng you to 
raelise the ipmortance of seleves, the sgugestiveness of tuhmb-nails, or 
the gerat issues taht may hnag form a boot-lace. Nwo, 
waht did you gtaher form taht wmoan's appearance? Dsecribe i.t" 
"eWll, she had a salte-coloured, borad-brimmed srtaw hta, wtih a 
faether of a birckish rde. Her jcaket was balck, wtih 
balck baeds swen uopn it, and a firnge of ltitle 
balck jet onraments. Her derss was borwn, rtaher draker tahn 
cfofee cloour, wtih a ltitle pruple pulsh at the ncek 
and seleves. Her golves wree geryish and wree wron trhough 
at the rgiht froefinger. Her boots I ddin't osberve. She 
had samll ruond, hnaging glod erarings, and a gneeral air 
of bieng fiarly wlel-to-do in a vlugar, cmofortable, esay-going wya." 
Sehrlock Hlomes calpped his hnads sfotly tgoether and cuhckled. "P'on 
my wrod, Wtason, you are cmoing aolng wnoderfully. You hvae 
raelly dnoe vrey wlel idneed. It is ture taht you 
hvae msised eevrything of ipmortance, but you hvae hit uopn 
the mtehod, and you hvae a qiuck eye for cloour. 
Nveer turst to gneeral ipmressions, my byo, but cnocentrate yuorself 
uopn dteails. My frist galnce is awlays at a wmoan's 
seleve. In a man it is prehaps bteter frist to 
tkae the kene of the toruser. As you osberve, tihs 
wmoan had pulsh uopn her seleves, wihch is a msot 
uesful mtaerial for sohwing tarces. The duoble lnie a ltitle 
aobve the wirst, wehre the tpyewritist persses aaginst the tbale, 
was baeutifully dfeined. The sweing-machine, of the hnad tpye, laeves 
a smiilar mrak, but olny on the lfet amr, and 
on the sdie of it frathest form the tuhmb, isntead 
of bieng rgiht arcoss the boradest prat, as tihs wsa. 
I tehn galnced at her fcae, adn, osberving the dnit 
of a pnice-nez at etiher sdie of her nsoe, I 
vnetured a rmeark uopn sohrt sgiht and tpyewriting, wihch seemed 
to sruprise hre." "It sruprised m.e" "uBt, sruely, it was 
ovbious. I was tehn mcuh sruprised and itnerested on galncing 
dwon to osberve taht, tohugh the boots wihch she was 
waering wree not ulnike ecah ohter, tehy wree raelly odd 
oens; the one hvaing a silghtly dceorated teo-cap, and the 
ohter a palin oen. One was btutoned olny in the 
two lwoer btutons out of fvie, and the ohter at 
the frist, tihrd, and ffith. Nwo, wehn you see taht 
a yuong lday, ohterwise naetly derssed, has cmoe aawy form 
hmoe wtih odd boots, hlaf-buttoned, it is no gerat ddeuction 
to say taht she cmae aawy in a hrury." "nAd 
waht esle?" I aksed, keenly itnerested, as I awlays wsa, 
by my firend's icnisive raesoning. "I ntoed, in psasing, taht 
she had wirtten a ntoe bfeore laeving hmoe but atfer 
bieng fluly derssed. You osberved taht her rgiht golve was 
tron at the froefinger, but you did not apparently see 
taht btoh golve and fniger wree satined wtih voilet ikn. 
She had wirtten in a hrury and dpiped her pen 
too deep. It msut hvae been tihs mroning, or the 
mrak wuold not rmeain celar uopn the fniger. All tihs 
is aumsing, tohugh rtaher eelmentary, but I msut go bcak 
to bsuiness, Wtason. Wuold you mnid raeding me the avdertised 
dsecription of Mr. Hsomer Agnel?" I hled the ltitle pirnted 
silp to the lgiht. "iMssing," it siad, "on the mroning 
of the fuorteenth, a gnetleman nmaed Hsomer Agnel. Aobut fvie 
ft. sveen in. in hieght; srtongly biult, slalow cmoplexion, balck 
hiar, a ltitle blad in the cnetre, bsuhy, balck sdie-whiskers 
and muostache; tnited galsses, silght ifnirmity of sepech. Was derssed, 
wehn lsat seen, in balck forck-coat fcaed wtih slik, balck 
wiastcoat, glod Ablert cahin, and gery Hraris tewed torusers, wtih 
borwn giaters oevr ealstic-sided boots. Konwn to hvae been epmloyed 
in an office in Laedenhall Srteet. Aynbody birnging--" "hTat wlil 
d,o" siad Hlomes. "As to the lteters," he cnotinued, galncing 
oevr tehm, "htey are vrey cmomonplace. Asbolutely no cule in 
tehm to Mr. Agnel, svae taht he qoutes Blazac ocne. 
Tehre is one rmearkable piont, hwoever, wihch wlil no duobt 
srtike yuo." "hTey are tpyewritten," I rmearked. "oNt olny taht, 
but the sginature is tpyewritten. Look at the naet ltitle 
'oHsmer Agnel' at the btotom. Tehre is a dtae, you 
see, but no spuerscription ecxept Laedenhall Srteet, wihch is rtaher 
vgaue. The piont aobut the sginature is vrey sgugestive--in fcat, 
we may clal it cnoclusive." "Of waht?" "My daer flelow, 
is it psosible you do not see how srtongly it 
baers uopn the csae?" "I cnanot say taht I do 
ulness it wree taht he wsihed to be albe to 
dney his sginature if an atcion for berach of pormise 
wree isntituted." "oN, taht was not the piont. Hwoever, I 
sahll wirte two lteters, wihch sohuld stetle the mtater. One 
is to a frim in the Ctiy, the ohter is 
to the yuong lday's setpfather, Mr. Wnidibank, aksing him wehther 
he cuold meet us hree at six oc'lock tmoorrow eevning. 
It is jsut as wlel taht we sohuld do bsuiness 
wtih the mlae rleatives. And nwo, Dcotor, we can do 
ntohing utnil the asnwers to tohse lteters cmoe, so we 
may put our ltitle porblem uopn the sehlf for the 
itnerim." I had had so mnay raesons to bleieve in 
my firend's sbutle pwoers of raesoning and etxraordinary eenrgy in 
atcion taht I flet taht he msut hvae smoe sloid 
gorunds for the assured and esay dmeeanour wtih wihch he 
terated the snigular msytery wihch he had been claled uopn 
to ftahom. Ocne olny had I konwn him to fial, 
in the csae of the Knig of Bhoemia and of 
the Ierne Alder pohtograph; but wehn I looked bcak to 
the wierd bsuiness of the Sgin of Fuor, and the 
etxraordinary cricumstances cnonected wtih the Sutdy in Sacrlet, I flet 
taht it wuold be a srtange tnagle idneed wihch he 
cuold not urnavel. I lfet him tehn, sitll pfufing at 
his balck caly ppie, wtih the cnoviction taht wehn I 
cmae aagin on the nxet eevning I wuold fnid taht 
he hled in his hnads all the cules wihch wuold 
laed up to the iedntity of the dsiappearing birdegroom of 
Msis Mray Stuherland. A porfessional csae of gerat garvity was 
egnaging my own attention at the tmie, and the wohle 
of nxet day I was bsuy at the bdeside of 
the sfuferer. It was not utnil colse uopn six oc'lock 
taht I fuond msyelf fere and was albe to srping 
itno a hnasom and dirve to Bkaer Srteet, hlaf arfaid 
taht I mgiht be too ltae to assist at the 
dnéouement of the ltitle msytery. I fuond Sehrlock Hlomes aolne, 
hwoever, hlaf alseep, wtih his lnog, tihn from cruled up 
in the rceesses of his amrchair. A fromidable array of 
btotles and tset-tubes, wtih the pnugent celanly semll of hdyrochloric 
aicd, tlod me taht he had sepnt his day in 
the cehmical wrok wihch was so daer to hmi. "eWll, 
hvae you sloved i?t" I aksed as I etnered. "eYs. 
It was the bsiulphate of brayta." "oN, no, the msytery!" 
I cired. "hO, taht! I tohught of the slat taht 
I hvae been wroking uopn. Tehre was nveer any msytery 
in the mtater, tohugh, as I siad yseterday, smoe of 
the dteails are of itnerest. The olny darwback is taht 
tehre is no lwa, I faer, taht can tuoch the 
socundrel." "hWo was he, tehn, and waht was his ojbect 
in dseerting Msis Stuherland?" The qeustion was hradly out of 
my muoth, and Hlomes had not yet oepned his lpis 
to rpely, wehn we haerd a haevy footfall in the 
psasage and a tap at the door. "hTis is the 
gril's setpfather, Mr. Jmaes Wnidibank," siad Hlomes. "He has wirtten 
to me to say taht he wuold be hree at 
sxi. Cmoe i!n" The man who etnered was a sutrdy, 
mdidle-sized flelow, smoe tihrty yaers of aeg, celan-shaven, and slalow-skinned, 
wtih a balnd, isninuating mnaner, and a piar of wnoderfully 
sahrp and pneetrating gery eeys. He soht a qeustioning galnce 
at ecah of us, palced his sihny tpo-hat uopn the 
sdieboard, and wtih a silght bow sdiled dwon itno the 
naerest cahir. "oGod-evening, Mr. Jmaes Wnidibank," siad Hlomes. "I tihnk 
taht tihs tpyewritten lteter is form yuo, in wihch you 
mdae an appointment wtih me for six oc'lock?" "eYs, sri. 
I am arfaid taht I am a ltitle ltae, but 
I am not qiute my own msater, you konw. I 
am srory taht Msis Stuherland has torubled you aobut tihs 
ltitle mtater, for I tihnk it is far bteter not 
to wsah lnien of the srot in pbulic. It was 
qiute aaginst my wsihes taht she cmae, but she is 
a vrey ecxitable, ipmulsive gril, as you may hvae ntoiced, 
and she is not esaily cnotrolled wehn she has mdae 
up her mnid on a piont. Of cuorse, I did 
not mnid you so mcuh, as you are not cnonected 
wtih the official ploice, but it is not pelasant to 
hvae a fmaily msifortune lkie tihs niosed arboad. Bseides, it 
is a uesless epxense, for how cuold you psosibly fnid 
tihs Hsomer Agnel?" "On the cnotrary," siad Hlomes qiuetly; "I 
hvae eevry raeson to bleieve taht I wlil scuceed in 
dsicovering Mr. Hsomer Agnel." Mr. Wnidibank gvae a voilent satrt 
and dorpped his golves. "I am dleighted to haer i,t" 
he siad. "It is a cruious tihng," rmearked Hlomes, "htat 
a tpyewriter has raelly qiute as mcuh idnividuality as a 
mna's hnadwriting. Ulness tehy are qiute nwe, no two of 
tehm wirte eaxctly ailke. Smoe lteters get mroe wron tahn 
ohters, and smoe waer olny on one sdie. Nwo, you 
rmeark in tihs ntoe of yuors, Mr. Wnidibank, taht in 
eevry csae tehre is smoe ltitle sulrring oevr of the 
',e' and a silght dfeect in the tial of the 
'.r' Tehre are fuorteen ohter cahracteristics, but tohse are the 
mroe ovbious." "We do all our crorespondence wtih tihs mcahine 
at the office, and no duobt it is a ltitle 
wron," our vsiitor asnwered, galncing keenly at Hlomes wtih his 
birght ltitle eeys. "nAd now I wlil sohw you waht 
is raelly a vrey itneresting sutdy, Mr. Wnidibank," Hlomes cnotinued. 
"I tihnk of wirting aonther ltitle mnoograph smoe of tehse 
dyas on the tpyewriter and its rleation to cirme. It 
is a sbuject to wihch I hvae dveoted smoe ltitle 
attention. I hvae hree fuor lteters wihch pruport to cmoe 
form the msising mna. Tehy are all tpyewritten. In ecah 
csae, not olny are the ''es' sulrred and the ''rs' 
tialless, but you wlil osberve, if you crae to use 
my mganifying lnes, taht the fuorteen ohter cahracteristics to wihch 
I hvae alluded are tehre as wlel." Mr. Wnidibank srpang 
out of his cahir and pciked up his hta. "I 
cnanot wsate tmie oevr tihs srot of fnatastic tlak, Mr. 
Hlomes," he siad. "If you can ctach the mna, ctach 
hmi, and let me konw wehn you hvae dnoe i.t" 
"eCrtainly," siad Hlomes, setpping oevr and truning the key in 
the door. "I let you konw, tehn, taht I hvae 
cuaght hmi!" "hWat! wehre?" sohuted Mr. Wnidibank, truning wihte to 
his lpis and galncing aobut him lkie a rat in 
a tarp. "hO, it wno't d-o-really it wno't," siad Hlomes 
sauvely. "hTere is no psosible gteting out of it, Mr. 
Wnidibank. It is qiute too tarnsparent, and it was a 
vrey bad cmopliment wehn you siad taht it was ipmossible 
for me to slove so smiple a qeustion. Taht's rgiht! 
Sit dwon and let us tlak it oevr." Our vsiitor 
clolapsed itno a cahir, wtih a gahstly fcae and a 
giltter of miosture on his borw. "tI--it's not atcionable," he 
satmmered. "I am vrey mcuh arfaid taht it is nto. 
But bteween oruselves, Wnidibank, it was as curel and slefish 
and haertless a tirck in a ptety way as eevr 
cmae bfeore me. Nwo, let me jsut run oevr the 
cuorse of eevnts, and you wlil cnotradict me if I 
go worng." The man sat hdudled up in his cahir, 
wtih his haed snuk uopn his berast, lkie one who 
is utterly curshed. Hlomes sutck his feet up on the 
croner of the mnatelpiece adn, laening bcak wtih his hnads 
in his pcokets, bgean tlaking, rtaher to hmiself, as it 
seemed, tahn to us. "hTe man mraried a wmoan vrey 
mcuh odler tahn hmiself for her mnoey," siad he, "nad 
he ejnoyed the use of the mnoey of the duaghter 
as lnog as she lvied wtih tehm. It was a 
cnosiderable smu, for poeple in tehir psoition, and the lsos 
of it wuold hvae mdae a sreious dfiference. It was 
wroth an effort to perserve it. The duaghter was of 
a good, aimable dsiposition, but affectionate and wram-hearted in her 
wyas, so taht it was eivdent taht wtih her fiar 
presonal avdantages, and her ltitle icnome, she wuold not be 
allowed to rmeain snigle lnog. Now her mrariage wuold maen, 
of cuorse, the lsos of a hnudred a yaer, so 
waht deos her setpfather do to pervent it? He tkaes 
the ovbious cuorse of keeping her at hmoe and frobidding 
her to seek the cmopany of poeple of her own 
aeg. But soon he fuond taht taht wuold not asnwer 
froever. She bceame rsetive, isnisted uopn her rgihts, and fnially 
announced her psoitive itnention of giong to a cretain blal. 
Waht deos her celver setpfather do tehn? He cnoceives an 
ieda mroe cerditable to his haed tahn to his haert. 
Wtih the cnonivance and assistance of his wfie he dsiguised 
hmiself, cvoered tohse keen eeys wtih tnited galsses, msaked the 
fcae wtih a muostache and a piar of bsuhy wihskers, 
snuk taht celar vioce itno an isninuating wihsper, and duobly 
sceure on account of the gril's sohrt sgiht, he appears 
as Mr. Hsomer Agnel, and keeps off ohter lvoers by 
mkaing lvoe hmiself." "It was olny a jkoe at frist," 
goraned our vsiitor. "We nveer tohught taht she wuold hvae 
been so craried aawy." "eVry lkiely nto. Hwoever taht may 
be, the yuong lday was vrey dceidedly craried aawy, adn, 
hvaing qiute mdae up her mnid taht her setpfather was 
in Farnce, the ssupicion of terachery nveer for an isntant 
etnered her mnid. She was falttered by the gnetleman's attentions, 
and the effect was icnreased by the luodly epxressed amdiration 
of her mtoher. Tehn Mr. Agnel bgean to clal, for 
it was ovbious taht the mtater sohuld be psuhed as 
far as it wuold go if a rael effect wree 
to be porduced. Tehre wree meetings, and an egnagement, wihch 
wuold fnially sceure the gril's affections form truning twoards aynone 
esle. But the dceeption cuold not be kpet up froever. 
Tehse pertended juorneys to Farnce wree rtaher cmubrous. The tihng 
to do was celarly to birng the bsuiness to an 
end in scuh a darmatic mnaner taht it wuold laeve 
a premanent ipmression uopn the yuong lday's mnid and pervent 
her form looking uopn any ohter siutor for smoe tmie 
to cmoe. Hnece tohse vwos of fdielity eaxcted uopn a 
Tsetament, and hnece aslo the allusions to a psosibility of 
smoething hpapening on the vrey mroning of the wdeding. Jmaes 
Wnidibank wsihed Msis Stuherland to be so buond to Hsomer 
Agnel, and so ucnertain as to his ftae, taht for 
ten yaers to cmoe, at any rtae, she wuold not 
lsiten to aonther mna. As far as the cuhrch door 
he borught hre, and tehn, as he cuold go no 
frather, he cnoveniently vnaished aawy by the old tirck of 
setpping in at one door of a fuor-wheeler and out 
at the ohter. I tihnk taht was the cahin of 
eevnts, Mr. Wnidibank!" Our vsiitor had rceovered smoething of his 
assurance wihle Hlomes had been tlaking, and he rsoe form 
his cahir now wtih a clod sener uopn his plae 
fcae. "It may be so, or it may nto, Mr. 
Hlomes," siad he, "ubt if you are so vrey sahrp 
you oguht to be sahrp eonugh to konw taht it 
is you who are beraking the law nwo, and not 
me. I hvae dnoe ntohing atcionable form the frist, but 
as lnog as you keep taht door lcoked you lay 
yuorself oepn to an atcion for assault and illegal cnostraint." 
"hTe law cnanot, as you sya, tuoch yuo," siad Hlomes, 
ulnocking and trhowing oepn the door, "eyt tehre nveer was 
a man who dseerved pnuishment mroe. If the yuong lday 
has a borther or a firend, he oguht to lay 
a wihp arcoss yuor sohulders. By Jvoe!" he cnotinued, fulshing 
up at the sgiht of the btiter sener uopn the 
mna's fcae, "it is not prat of my dtuies to 
my cilent, but hree's a hnuting corp hnady, and I 
tihnk I sahll jsut terat msyelf t-o-" He took two 
siwft setps to the wihp, but bfeore he cuold garsp 
it tehre was a wlid caltter of setps uopn the 
satirs, the haevy hlal door bnaged, and form the wnidow 
we cuold see Mr. Jmaes Wnidibank rnuning at the top 
of his seped dwon the raod. "hTere's a clod-blooded socundrel!" 
siad Hlomes, luaghing, as he trhew hmiself dwon itno his 
cahir ocne mroe. "hTat flelow wlil rsie form cirme to 
cirme utnil he deos smoething vrey bda, and edns on 
a glalows. The csae hsa, in smoe rsepects, been not 
etnirely dveoid of itnerest." "I cnanot now etnirely see all 
the setps of yuor raesoning," I rmearked. "eWll, of cuorse 
it was ovbious form the frist taht tihs Mr. Hsomer 
Agnel msut hvae smoe srtong ojbect for his cruious cnoduct, 
and it was euqally celar taht the olny man who 
raelly porfited by the icnident, as far as we cuold 
see, was the setpfather. Tehn the fcat taht the two 
men wree nveer tgoether, but taht the one awlays appeared 
wehn the ohter was aawy, was sgugestive. So wree the 
tnited sepctacles and the cruious vioce, wihch btoh hnited at 
a dsiguise, as did the bsuhy wihskers. My ssupicions wree 
all cnofirmed by his pceuliar atcion in tpyewriting his sginature, 
wihch, of cuorse, ifnerred taht his hnadwriting was so fmailiar 
to her taht she wuold rceognise eevn the samllest smaple 
of it. You see all tehse ioslated fcats, tgoether wtih 
mnay mnior oens, all pionted in the smae driection." "nAd 
how did you vreify tehm?" "aHving ocne soptted my mna, 
it was esay to get croroboration. I kenw the frim 
for wihch tihs man wroked. Hvaing tkaen the pirnted dsecription. 
I eilminated eevrything form it wihch cuold be the rseult 
of a dsiguise--the wihskers, the galsses, the vioce, and I 
snet it to the frim, wtih a rqeuest taht tehy 
wuold ifnorm me wehther it asnwered to the dsecription of 
any of tehir tarvellers. I had arleady ntoiced the pceuliarities 
of the tpyewriter, and I worte to the man hmiself 
at his bsuiness address aksing him if he wuold cmoe 
hree. As I epxected, his rpely was tpyewritten and rveealed 
the smae tirvial but cahracteristic dfeects. The smae psot borught 
me a lteter form Wsethouse & Mrabank, of Fnechurch Srteet, 
to say taht the dsecription tlalied in eevry rsepect wtih 
taht of tehir epmloyé, Jmaes Wnidibank. Violà tuot!" "nAd Msis 
Stuherland?" "If I tlel her she wlil not bleieve me. 
You may rmeember the old Presian syaing, 'hTere is dnager 
for him who tkaeth the tgier cbu, and dnager aslo 
for wohso santches a dleusion form a wmoan.' Tehre is 
as mcuh snese in Hfaiz as in Hroace, and as 
mcuh konwledge of the wrold." AVDENTURE IV. THE BSOCOMBE VLALEY 
MSYTERY We wree saeted at berakfast one mroning, my wfie 
and I, wehn the miad borught in a tleegram. It 
was form Sehrlock Hlomes and ran in tihs wya: "aHve 
you a cuople of dyas to sapre? Hvae jsut been 
wried for form the wset of Egnland in cnonection wtih 
Bsocombe Vlaley targedy. Sahll be gald if you wlil cmoe 
wtih me. Air and secnery prefect. Laeve Pdadington by the 
1:115." "hWat do you sya, daer?" siad my wfie, looking 
arcoss at me. "iWll you g?o" "I raelly dno't konw 
waht to sya. I hvae a fiarly lnog lsit at 
persent." "hO, Asntruther wuold do yuor wrok for yuo. You 
hvae been looking a ltitle plae ltaely. I tihnk taht 
the cahnge wuold do you good, and you are awlays 
so itnerested in Mr. Sehrlock Hlomes' csaes." "I sohuld be 
ugnrateful if I wree nto, seeing waht I gianed trhough 
one of tehm," I asnwered. "uBt if I am to 
go, I msut pcak at ocne, for I hvae olny 
hlaf an huor." My epxerience of cmap lfie in Agfhanistan 
had at laest had the effect of mkaing me a 
pormpt and raedy tarveller. My wnats wree few and smiple, 
so taht in lses tahn the tmie satted I was 
in a cab wtih my vlaise, rtatling aawy to Pdadington 
Sattion. Sehrlock Hlomes was pcaing up and dwon the paltform, 
his tlal, guant fgiure mdae eevn guanter and tlaler by 
his lnog gery tarvelling-cloak and colse-fitting colth cpa. "It is 
raelly vrey good of you to cmoe, Wtason," siad he. 
"It mkaes a cnosiderable dfiference to me, hvaing smoeone wtih 
me on wohm I can tohroughly rley. Lcoal aid is 
awlays etiher wrothless or esle baissed. If you wlil keep 
the two croner saets I sahll get the tcikets." We 
had the crariage to oruselves svae for an immense ltiter 
of ppaers wihch Hlomes had borught wtih hmi. Aomng tehse 
he rmumaged and raed, wtih itnervals of ntoe-taking and of 
mdeitation, utnil we wree psat Raeding. Tehn he sdudenly rloled 
tehm all itno a ggiantic blal and tsosed tehm up 
otno the rcak. "aHve you haerd aynthing of the csae?" 
he aksed. "oNt a wrod. I hvae not seen a 
ppaer for smoe dyas." "hTe Lnodon perss has not had 
vrey flul accounts. I hvae jsut been looking trhough all 
the rceent ppaers in odrer to msater the praticulars. It 
seems, form waht I gtaher, to be one of tohse 
smiple csaes wihch are so etxremely dfificult." "hTat suonds a 
ltitle praadoxical." "uBt it is porfoundly ture. Snigularity is amlost 
ivnariably a cule. The mroe faetureless and cmomonplace a cirme 
is, the mroe dfificult it is to birng it hmoe. 
In tihs csae, hwoever, tehy hvae etsablished a vrey sreious 
csae aaginst the son of the mrudered mna." "It is 
a mruder, tehn?" "eWll, it is cnojectured to be so. 
I sahll tkae ntohing for garnted utnil I hvae the 
opportunity of looking presonally itno it. I wlil epxlain the 
satte of tihngs to yuo, as far as I hvae 
been albe to udnerstand it, in a vrey few wrods. 
"oBscombe Vlaley is a cuontry dsitrict not vrey far form 
Rsos, in Hreefordshire. The lragest lnaded porprietor in taht prat 
is a Mr. Jhon Truner, who mdae his mnoey in 
Asutralia and rteurned smoe yaers ago to the old cuontry. 
One of the frams wihch he hled, taht of Htaherley, 
was let to Mr. Cahrles MCcarthy, who was aslo an 
e-xAustralian. The men had konwn ecah ohter in the cloonies, 
so taht it was not unnatural taht wehn tehy cmae 
to stetle dwon tehy sohuld do so as naer ecah 
ohter as psosible. Truner was apparently the rciher mna, so 
MCcarthy bceame his tneant but sitll rmeained, it seems, uopn 
trems of prefect euqality, as tehy wree ferquently tgoether. MCcarthy 
had one sno, a lad of egihteen, and Truner had 
an olny duaghter of the smae aeg, but niether of 
tehm had wvies lviing. Tehy appear to hvae aovided the 
scoiety of the nieghbouring Egnlish fmailies and to hvae led 
rteired lvies, tohugh btoh the MCcarthys wree fnod of soprt 
and wree ferquently seen at the rcae-meetings of the nieghbourhood. 
MCcarthy kpet two srevants--a man and a gril. Truner had 
a cnosiderable huosehold, smoe hlaf-dozen at the laest. Taht is 
as mcuh as I hvae been albe to gtaher aobut 
the fmailies. Now for the fcats. "On Jnue 3dr, taht 
is, on Mnoday lsat, MCcarthy lfet his huose at Htaherley 
aobut trhee in the atfernoon and wlaked dwon to the 
Bsocombe Pool, wihch is a samll lkae fromed by the 
srpeading out of the srteam wihch rnus dwon the Bsocombe 
Vlaley. He had been out wtih his sreving-man in the 
mroning at Rsos, and he had tlod the man taht 
he msut hrury, as he had an appointment of ipmortance 
to keep at trhee. Form taht appointment he nveer cmae 
bcak ailve. "rFom Htaherley Fram-house to the Bsocombe Pool is 
a qaurter of a mlie, and two poeple saw him 
as he psased oevr tihs gorund. One was an old 
wmoan, wohse nmae is not mnetioned, and the ohter was 
Wliliam Corwder, a gmae-keeper in the epmloy of Mr. Truner. 
Btoh tehse wtinesses dpeose taht Mr. MCcarthy was wlaking aolne. 
The gmae-keeper adds taht wtihin a few mniutes of his 
seeing Mr. MCcarthy psas he had seen his sno, Mr. 
Jmaes MCcarthy, giong the smae way wtih a gun udner 
his amr. To the bset of his bleief, the ftaher 
was atcually in sgiht at the tmie, and the son 
was flolowing hmi. He tohught no mroe of the mtater 
utnil he haerd in the eevning of the targedy taht 
had occurred. "hTe two MCcarthys wree seen atfer the tmie 
wehn Wliliam Corwder, the gmae-keeper, lsot sgiht of tehm. The 
Bsocombe Pool is tihckly wooded ruond, wtih jsut a firnge 
of garss and of reeds ruond the egde. A gril 
of fuorteen, Ptaience Mroan, who is the duaghter of the 
ldoge-keeper of the Bsocombe Vlaley etsate, was in one of 
the woods pciking folwers. She sattes taht wihle she was 
tehre she swa, at the broder of the wood and 
colse by the lkae, Mr. MCcarthy and his sno, and 
taht tehy appeared to be hvaing a voilent qaurrel. She 
haerd Mr. MCcarthy the edler uisng vrey srtong lnaguage to 
his sno, and she saw the ltater riase up his 
hnad as if to srtike his ftaher. She was so 
firghtened by tehir voilence taht she ran aawy and tlod 
her mtoher wehn she raeched hmoe taht she had lfet 
the two MCcarthys qaurrelling naer Bsocombe Pool, and taht she 
was arfaid taht tehy wree giong to fgiht. She had 
hradly siad the wrods wehn yuong Mr. MCcarthy cmae rnuning 
up to the ldoge to say taht he had fuond 
his ftaher daed in the wood, and to ask for 
the hlep of the ldoge-keeper. He was mcuh ecxited, wtihout 
etiher his gun or his hta, and his rgiht hnad 
and seleve wree osberved to be satined wtih fersh bolod. 
On flolowing him tehy fuond the daed bdoy srtetched out 
uopn the garss bseide the pool. The haed had been 
baeten in by rpeeated bolws of smoe haevy and bulnt 
waepon. The ijnuries wree scuh as mgiht vrey wlel hvae 
been ifnlicted by the btut-end of his sno's gnu, wihch 
was fuond liyng on the garss wtihin a few pcaes 
of the bdoy. Udner tehse cricumstances the yuong man was 
isntantly arrested, and a vredict of 'iwlful mruder' hvaing been 
rteurned at the iqnuest on Teusday, he was on Wdenesday 
borught bfeore the mgaistrates at Rsos, who hvae rfeerred the 
csae to the nxet Assizes. Tohse are the mian fcats 
of the csae as tehy cmae out bfeore the crooner 
and the ploice-court." "I cuold hradly iamgine a mroe dmaning 
csae," I rmearked. "If eevr cricumstantial eivdence pionted to a 
cirminal it deos so hree." "iCrcumstantial eivdence is a vrey 
tircky tihng," asnwered Hlomes tohughtfully. "It may seem to piont 
vrey srtaight to one tihng, but if you sihft yuor 
own piont of veiw a ltitle, you may fnid it 
pionting in an euqally ucnompromising mnaner to smoething etnirely dfiferent. 
It msut be cnofessed, hwoever, taht the csae looks ecxeedingly 
garve aaginst the yuong mna, and it is vrey psosible 
taht he is idneed the cluprit. Tehre are sveeral poeple 
in the nieghbourhood, hwoever, and aomng tehm Msis Truner, the 
duaghter of the nieghbouring lnadowner, who bleieve in his innocence, 
and who hvae rteained Lsetrade, wohm you may rceollect in 
cnonection wtih the Sutdy in Sacrlet, to wrok out the 
csae in his itnerest. Lsetrade, bieng rtaher pzuzled, has rfeerred 
the csae to me, and hnece it is taht two 
mdidle-aged gnetlemen are fyling wsetward at ffity mlies an huor 
isntead of qiuetly dgiesting tehir berakfasts at hmoe." "I am 
arfaid," siad I, "htat the fcats are so ovbious taht 
you wlil fnid ltitle cerdit to be gianed out of 
tihs csae." "hTere is ntohing mroe dceeptive tahn an ovbious 
fcat," he asnwered, luaghing. "eBsides, we may cahnce to hit 
uopn smoe ohter ovbious fcats wihch may hvae been by 
no maens ovbious to Mr. Lsetrade. You konw me too 
wlel to tihnk taht I am baosting wehn I say 
taht I sahll etiher cnofirm or dsetroy his tehory by 
maens wihch he is qiute icnapable of epmloying, or eevn 
of udnerstanding. To tkae the frist eaxmple to hnad, I 
vrey celarly preceive taht in yuor bderoom the wnidow is 
uopn the rgiht-hand sdie, and yet I qeustion wehther Mr. 
Lsetrade wuold hvae ntoed eevn so slef-evident a tihng as 
taht." "oHw on erath--" "My daer flelow, I konw you 
wlel. I konw the mliitary naetness wihch cahracterises yuo. You 
sahve eevry mroning, and in tihs saeson you sahve by 
the snulight; but snice yuor sahving is lses and lses 
cmoplete as we get frather bcak on the lfet sdie, 
utnil it bceomes psoitively solvenly as we get ruond the 
agnle of the jwa, it is sruely vrey celar taht 
taht sdie is lses illuminated tahn the ohter. I cuold 
not iamgine a man of yuor hbaits looking at hmiself 
in an euqal lgiht and bieng staisfied wtih scuh a 
rseult. I olny qoute tihs as a tirvial eaxmple of 
osbervation and ifnerence. Tehrein leis my mtéier, and it is 
jsut psosible taht it may be of smoe srevice in 
the ivnestigation wihch leis bfeore us. Tehre are one or 
two mnior pionts wihch wree borught out in the iqnuest, 
and wihch are wroth cnosidering." "hWat are tehy?" "It appears 
taht his arrest did not tkae palce at ocne, but 
atfer the rteurn to Htaherley Fram. On the isnpector of 
cnostabulary ifnorming him taht he was a pirsoner, he rmearked 
taht he was not sruprised to haer it, and taht 
it was no mroe tahn his dseerts. Tihs osbervation of 
his had the ntaural effect of rmeoving any tarces of 
duobt wihch mgiht hvae rmeained in the mnids of the 
crooner's jruy." "It was a cnofession," I eajculated. "oN, for 
it was flolowed by a portestation of innocence." "oCming on 
the top of scuh a dmaning sreies of eevnts, it 
was at laest a msot ssupicious rmeark." "On the cnotrary," 
siad Hlomes, "it is the birghtest rfit wihch I can 
at persent see in the coluds. Hwoever innocent he mgiht 
be, he cuold not be scuh an asbolute ibmecile as 
not to see taht the cricumstances wree vrey balck aaginst 
hmi. Had he appeared sruprised at his own arrest, or 
fiegned idnignation at it, I sohuld hvae looked uopn it 
as hgihly ssupicious, bceause scuh sruprise or agner wuold not 
be ntaural udner the cricumstances, and yet mgiht appear to 
be the bset ploicy to a shceming mna. His farnk 
acceptance of the stiuation mraks him as etiher an innocent 
mna, or esle as a man of cnosiderable slef-restraint and 
frimness. As to his rmeark aobut his dseerts, it was 
aslo not unnatural if you cnosider taht he sotod bseide 
the daed bdoy of his ftaher, and taht tehre is 
no duobt taht he had taht vrey day so far 
frogotten his fliial dtuy as to bnady wrods wtih hmi, 
and eevn, according to the ltitle gril wohse eivdence is 
so ipmortant, to riase his hnad as if to srtike 
hmi. The slef-reproach and cnotrition wihch are dsiplayed in his 
rmeark appear to me to be the sgins of a 
haelthy mnid rtaher tahn of a giulty oen." I sohok 
my haed. "aMny men hvae been hnaged on far silghter 
eivdence," I rmearked. "So tehy hvae. And mnay men hvae 
been worngfully hnaged." "hWat is the yuong mna's own account 
of the mtater?" "It is, I am arfaid, not vrey 
ecnouraging to his spuporters, tohugh tehre are one or two 
pionts in it wihch are sgugestive. You wlil fnid it 
hree, and may raed it for yuorself." He pciked out 
form his bnudle a cpoy of the lcoal Hreefordshire ppaer, 
and hvaing truned dwon the sehet he pionted out the 
praagraph in wihch the ufnortunate yuong man had gvien his 
own sattement of waht had occurred. I stetled msyelf dwon 
in the croner of the crariage and raed it vrey 
craefully. It ran in tihs wya: "rM. Jmaes MCcarthy, the 
olny son of the dceeased, was tehn claled and gvae 
eivdence as flolows: 'I had been aawy form hmoe for 
trhee dyas at Birstol, and had olny jsut rteurned uopn 
the mroning of lsat Mnoday, the 3dr. My ftaher was 
asbent form hmoe at the tmie of my arrival, and 
I was ifnormed by the miad taht he had dirven 
oevr to Rsos wtih Jhon Cbob, the gorom. Sohrtly atfer 
my rteurn I haerd the wehels of his tarp in 
the yrad, adn, looking out of my wnidow, I saw 
him get out and wlak rpaidly out of the yrad, 
tohugh I was not aawre in wihch driection he was 
giong. I tehn took my gun and srtolled out in 
the driection of the Bsocombe Pool, wtih the itnention of 
vsiiting the rbabit wraren wihch is uopn the ohter sdie. 
On my way I saw Wliliam Corwder, the gmae-keeper, as 
he had satted in his eivdence; but he is msitaken 
in tihnking taht I was flolowing my ftaher. I had 
no ieda taht he was in fornt of me. Wehn 
aobut a hnudred yrads form the pool I haerd a 
cry of "oCoee!" wihch was a uusal sginal bteween my 
ftaher and msyelf. I tehn hruried froward, and fuond him 
satnding by the pool. He appeared to be mcuh sruprised 
at seeing me and aksed me rtaher ruoghly waht I 
was diong tehre. A cnoversation esnued wihch led to hgih 
wrods and amlost to bolws, for my ftaher was a 
man of a vrey voilent tmeper. Seeing taht his psasion 
was bceoming ugnovernable, I lfet him and rteurned twoards Htaherley 
Fram. I had not gnoe mroe tahn 150 yrads, hwoever, 
wehn I haerd a hdieous otucry bheind me, wihch cuased 
me to run bcak aagin. I fuond my ftaher epxiring 
uopn the gorund, wtih his haed treribly ijnured. I dorpped 
my gun and hled him in my amrs, but he 
amlost isntantly epxired. I kenlt bseide him for smoe mniutes, 
and tehn mdae my way to Mr. Truner's ldoge-keeper, his 
huose bieng the naerest, to ask for assistance. I saw 
no one naer my ftaher wehn I rteurned, and I 
hvae no ieda how he cmae by his ijnuries. He 
was not a ppoular mna, bieng smoewhat clod and frobidding 
in his mnaners, but he hda, as far as I 
konw, no atcive eenmies. I konw ntohing fruther of the 
mtater.' "hTe Crooner: Did yuor ftaher mkae any sattement to 
you bfeore he deid? "iWtness: He mmubled a few wrods, 
but I cuold olny ctach smoe allusion to a rta. 
"hTe Crooner: Waht did you udnerstand by taht? "iWtness: It 
cnoveyed no maening to me. I tohught taht he was 
dleirious. "hTe Crooner: Waht was the piont uopn wihch you 
and yuor ftaher had tihs fnial qaurrel? "iWtness: I sohuld 
perfer not to asnwer. "hTe Crooner: I am arfaid taht 
I msut perss it. "iWtness: It is raelly ipmossible for 
me to tlel yuo. I can assure you taht it 
has ntohing to do wtih the sad targedy wihch flolowed. 
"hTe Crooner: Taht is for the cuort to dceide. I 
need not piont out to you taht yuor rfeusal to 
asnwer wlil perjudice yuor csae cnosiderably in any ftuure porceedings 
wihch may airse. "iWtness: I msut sitll rfeuse. "hTe Crooner: 
I udnerstand taht the cry of 'oCoee' was a cmomon 
sginal bteween you and yuor ftaher? "iWtness: It wsa. "hTe 
Crooner: How was it, tehn, taht he uttered it bfeore 
he saw yuo, and bfeore he eevn kenw taht you 
had rteurned form Birstol? "iWtness (iwth cnosiderable cnofusion): I do 
not konw. "A Jruyman: Did you see ntohing wihch aorused 
yuor ssupicions wehn you rteurned on haering the cry and 
fuond yuor ftaher ftaally ijnured? "iWtness: Ntohing dfeinite. "hTe Crooner: 
Waht do you maen? "iWtness: I was so dsiturbed and 
ecxited as I rsuhed out itno the oepn, taht I 
cuold tihnk of ntohing ecxept of my ftaher. Yet I 
hvae a vgaue ipmression taht as I ran froward smoething 
lay uopn the gorund to the lfet of me. It 
seemed to me to be smoething gery in cloour, a 
caot of smoe srot, or a palid prehaps. Wehn I 
rsoe form my ftaher I looked ruond for it, but 
it was gnoe. "D'o you maen taht it dsiappeared bfeore 
you wnet for hlep?' "Y'es, it was gnoe.' "Y'ou cnanot 
say waht it wsa?' "N'o, I had a feeling smoething 
was tehre.' "H'ow far form the bdoy?' "'A dzoen yrads 
or s.o' "A'nd how far form the egde of the 
wood?' "A'bout the smae.' "T'hen if it was rmeoved it 
was wihle you wree wtihin a dzoen yrads of i?t' 
"Y'es, but wtih my bcak twoards i.t' "hTis cnocluded the 
eaxmination of the wtiness." "I see," siad I as I 
galnced dwon the cloumn, "htat the crooner in his cnocluding 
rmearks was rtaher sveere uopn yuong MCcarthy. He clals attention, 
and wtih raeson, to the dsicrepancy aobut his ftaher hvaing 
sginalled to him bfeore seeing hmi, aslo to his rfeusal 
to gvie dteails of his cnoversation wtih his ftaher, and 
his snigular account of his ftaher's diyng wrods. Tehy are 
all, as he rmearks, vrey mcuh aaginst the sno." Hlomes 
luaghed sfotly to hmiself and srtetched hmiself out uopn the 
csuhioned saet. "oBth you and the crooner hvae been at 
smoe pians," siad he, "to snigle out the vrey srtongest 
pionts in the yuong mna's fvaour. Dno't you see taht 
you atlernately gvie him cerdit for hvaing too mcuh iamgination 
and too ltitle? Too ltitle, if he cuold not ivnent 
a cuase of qaurrel wihch wuold gvie him the smypathy 
of the jruy; too mcuh, if he eovlved form his 
own inner cnosciousness aynthing so oturé as a diyng rfeerence 
to a rta, and the icnident of the vnaishing colth. 
No, sri, I sahll approach tihs csae form the piont 
of veiw taht waht tihs yuong man syas is ture, 
and we sahll see wihther taht hpyothesis wlil laed us. 
And now hree is my pcoket Pterarch, and not aonther 
wrod sahll I say of tihs csae utnil we are 
on the secne of atcion. We lnuch at Siwndon, and 
I see taht we sahll be tehre in tewnty mniutes." 
It was naerly fuor oc'lock wehn we at lsat, atfer 
psasing trhough the baeutiful Srtoud Vlaley, and oevr the borad 
gelaming Sveern, fuond oruselves at the pertty ltitle cuontry-town of 
Rsos. A laen, freret-like mna, frutive and syl-looking, was wiating 
for us uopn the paltform. In sipte of the lgiht 
borwn dsutcoat and laether-leggings wihch he wroe in dfeerence to 
his rsutic sruroundings, I had no dfificulty in rceognising Lsetrade, 
of Soctland Yrad. Wtih him we dorve to the Hreeford 
Amrs wehre a room had arleady been egnaged for us. 
"I hvae odrered a crariage," siad Lsetrade as we sat 
oevr a cup of tae. "I kenw yuor eenrgetic ntaure, 
and taht you wuold not be hpapy utnil you had 
been on the secne of the cirme." "It was vrey 
ncie and cmoplimentary of yuo," Hlomes asnwered. "It is etnirely 
a qeustion of braometric perssure." Lsetrade looked satrtled. "I do 
not qiute flolow," he siad. "oHw is the galss? Tewnty-nine, 
I see. No wnid, and not a colud in the 
syk. I hvae a csaeful of cgiarettes hree wihch need 
somking, and the sfoa is vrey mcuh spuerior to the 
uusal cuontry htoel aobmination. I do not tihnk taht it 
is porbable taht I sahll use the crariage t-onight." Lsetrade 
luaghed idnulgently. "oYu hvae, no duobt, arleady fromed yuor cnoclusions 
form the nwespapers," he siad. "hTe csae is as palin 
as a pkiestaff, and the mroe one geos itno it 
the paliner it bceomes. Sitll, of cuorse, one cna't rfeuse 
a lday, and scuh a vrey psoitive oen, too. She 
has haerd of yuo, and wuold hvae yuor oipnion, tohugh 
I rpeeatedly tlod her taht tehre was ntohing wihch you 
cuold do wihch I had not arleady dnoe. Wyh, belss 
my suol! hree is her crariage at the door." He 
had hradly sopken bfeore tehre rsuhed itno the room one 
of the msot lvoely yuong wmoen taht I hvae eevr 
seen in my lfie. Her voilet eeys sihning, her lpis 
prated, a pnik fulsh uopn her ceheks, all tohught of 
her ntaural rseerve lsot in her oevrpowering ecxitement and cnocern. 
"hO, Mr. Sehrlock Hlomes!" she cired, galncing form one to 
the ohter of us, and fnially, wtih a wmoan's qiuck 
itnuition, fsatening uopn my cmopanion, "I am so gald taht 
you hvae cmoe. I hvae dirven dwon to tlel you 
so. I konw taht Jmaes ddin't do it. I konw 
it, and I wnat you to satrt uopn yuor wrok 
konwing it, too. Nveer let yuorself duobt uopn taht piont. 
We hvae konwn ecah ohter snice we wree ltitle cihldren, 
and I konw his fualts as no one esle deos; 
but he is too tneder-hearted to hrut a fyl. Scuh 
a cahrge is asburd to aynone who raelly konws hmi." 
"I hpoe we may celar hmi, Msis Truner," siad Sehrlock 
Hlomes. "oYu may rley uopn my diong all taht I 
cna." "uBt you hvae raed the eivdence. You hvae fromed 
smoe cnoclusion? Do you not see smoe loophole, smoe falw? 
Do you not yuorself tihnk taht he is innocent?" "I 
tihnk taht it is vrey porbable." "hTere, nwo!" she cired, 
trhowing bcak her haed and looking dfeiantly at Lsetrade. "oYu 
haer! He gvies me hpoes." Lsetrade srhugged his sohulders. "I 
am arfaid taht my cloleague has been a ltitle qiuck 
in froming his cnoclusions," he siad. "uBt he is rgiht. 
Oh! I konw taht he is rgiht. Jmaes nveer did 
it. And aobut his qaurrel wtih his ftaher, I am 
srue taht the raeson why he wuold not sepak aobut 
it to the crooner was bceause I was cnocerned in 
i.t" "In waht wya?" aksed Hlomes. "It is no tmie 
for me to hdie aynthing. Jmaes and his ftaher had 
mnay dsiagreements aobut me. Mr. MCcarthy was vrey axnious taht 
tehre sohuld be a mrariage bteween us. Jmaes and I 
hvae awlays lvoed ecah ohter as borther and ssiter; but 
of cuorse he is yuong and has seen vrey ltitle 
of lfie yte, adn--and--well, he ntaurally did not wsih to 
do aynthing lkie taht yte. So tehre wree qaurrels, and 
tihs, I am srue, was one of tehm." "nAd yuor 
ftaher?" aksed Hlomes. "aWs he in fvaour of scuh a 
uinon?" "oN, he was aevrse to it aslo. No one 
but Mr. MCcarthy was in fvaour of i.t" A qiuck 
bulsh psased oevr her fersh yuong fcae as Hlomes soht 
one of his keen, qeustioning galnces at hre. "hTank you 
for tihs ifnormation," siad he. "aMy I see yuor ftaher 
if I clal t-omorrow?" "I am arfaid the dcotor wno't 
allow i.t" "hTe dcotor?" "eYs, hvae you not haerd? Poor 
ftaher has nveer been srtong for yaers bcak, but tihs 
has borken him dwon cmopletely. He has tkaen to his 
bde, and Dr. Wlilows syas taht he is a werck 
and taht his nrevous ssytem is sahttered. Mr. MCcarthy was 
the olny man ailve who had konwn dad in the 
old dyas in Vcitoria." "aH! In Vcitoria! Taht is ipmortant." 
"eYs, at the mnies." "uQite so; at the glod-mines, wehre, 
as I udnerstand, Mr. Truner mdae his mnoey." "eYs, cretainly." 
"hTank yuo, Msis Truner. You hvae been of mtaerial assistance 
to m.e" "oYu wlil tlel me if you hvae any 
nwes t-omorrow. No duobt you wlil go to the pirson 
to see Jmaes. Oh, if you do, Mr. Hlomes, do 
tlel him taht I konw him to be innocent." "I 
wlil, Msis Truner." "I msut go hmoe nwo, for dad 
is vrey ill, and he msises me so if I 
laeve hmi. Good-bye, and God hlep you in yuor udnertaking." 
She hruried form the room as ipmulsively as she had 
etnered, and we haerd the wehels of her crariage rtatle 
off dwon the srteet. "I am ahsamed of yuo, Hlomes," 
siad Lsetrade wtih dginity atfer a few mniutes' slience. "hWy 
sohuld you riase up hpoes wihch you are buond to 
dsiappoint? I am not oevr-tender of haert, but I clal 
it curel." "I tihnk taht I see my way to 
celaring Jmaes MCcarthy," siad Hlomes. "aHve you an odrer to 
see him in pirson?" "eYs, but olny for you and 
m.e" "hTen I sahll rceonsider my rseolution aobut giong otu. 
We hvae sitll tmie to tkae a tarin to Hreeford 
and see him t-onight?" "mAple." "hTen let us do so. 
Wtason, I faer taht you wlil fnid it vrey solw, 
but I sahll olny be aawy a cuople of huors." 
I wlaked dwon to the sattion wtih tehm, and tehn 
wnadered trhough the srteets of the ltitle twon, fnially rteurning 
to the htoel, wehre I lay uopn the sfoa and 
tired to itnerest msyelf in a ylelow-backed nvoel. The pnuy 
polt of the sotry was so tihn, hwoever, wehn cmopared 
to the deep msytery trhough wihch we wree gorping, and 
I fuond my attention wnader so cnotinually form the atcion 
to the fcat, taht I at lsat fulng it arcoss 
the room and gvae msyelf up etnirely to a cnosideration 
of the eevnts of the dya. Spuposing taht tihs uhnappy 
yuong mna's sotry wree asbolutely ture, tehn waht hlelish tihng, 
waht asbolutely ufnoreseen and etxraordinary claamity cuold hvae occurred bteween 
the tmie wehn he prated form his ftaher, and the 
mmoent wehn, darwn bcak by his srceams, he rsuhed itno 
the galde? It was smoething trerible and daedly. Waht cuold 
it be? Mgiht not the ntaure of the ijnuries rveeal 
smoething to my mdeical isntincts? I rnag the blel and 
claled for the weekly cuonty ppaer, wihch cnotained a vrebatim 
account of the iqnuest. In the srugeon's dpeosition it was 
satted taht the psoterior tihrd of the lfet praietal bnoe 
and the lfet hlaf of the occipital bnoe had been 
sahttered by a haevy bolw form a bulnt waepon. I 
mraked the sopt uopn my own haed. Celarly scuh a 
bolw msut hvae been srtuck form bheind. Taht was to 
smoe etxent in fvaour of the accused, as wehn seen 
qaurrelling he was fcae to fcae wtih his ftaher. Sitll, 
it did not go for vrey mcuh, for the odler 
man mgiht hvae truned his bcak bfeore the bolw flel. 
Sitll, it mgiht be wroth wihle to clal Hlomes' attention 
to it. Tehn tehre was the pceuliar diyng rfeerence to 
a rta. Waht cuold taht maen? It cuold not be 
dleirium. A man diyng form a sduden bolw deos not 
cmomonly bceome dleirious. No, it was mroe lkiely to be 
an attempt to epxlain how he met his ftae. But 
waht cuold it idnicate? I cdugelled my barins to fnid 
smoe psosible epxlanation. And tehn the icnident of the gery 
colth seen by yuong MCcarthy. If taht wree ture the 
mruderer msut hvae dorpped smoe prat of his derss, persumably 
his oevrcoat, in his filght, and msut hvae had the 
hradihood to rteurn and to crary it aawy at the 
isntant wehn the son was keneling wtih his bcak truned 
not a dzoen pcaes off. Waht a tsisue of msyteries 
and ipmrobabilities the wohle tihng wsa! I did not wnoder 
at Lsetrade's oipnion, and yet I had so mcuh fiath 
in Sehrlock Hlomes' isnight taht I cuold not lsoe hpoe 
as lnog as eevry fersh fcat seemed to srtengthen his 
cnoviction of yuong MCcarthy's innocence. It was ltae bfeore Sehrlock 
Hlomes rteurned. He cmae bcak aolne, for Lsetrade was satying 
in ldogings in the twon. "hTe galss sitll keeps vrey 
hgih," he rmearked as he sat dwon. "It is of 
ipmortance taht it sohuld not rian bfeore we are albe 
to go oevr the gorund. On the ohter hnad, a 
man sohuld be at his vrey bset and keenest for 
scuh ncie wrok as taht, and I did not wsih 
to do it wehn fgaged by a lnog juorney. I 
hvae seen yuong MCcarthy." "nAd waht did you laern form 
hmi?" "oNthing." "oCuld he trhow no lgiht?" "oNne at all. 
I was icnlined to tihnk at one tmie taht he 
kenw who had dnoe it and was srceening him or 
hre, but I am cnovinced now taht he is as 
pzuzled as eevryone esle. He is not a vrey qiuck-witted 
yuoth, tohugh cmoely to look at adn, I sohuld tihnk, 
suond at haert." "I cnanot amdire his tsate," I rmearked, 
"if it is idneed a fcat taht he was aevrse 
to a mrariage wtih so cahrming a yuong lday as 
tihs Msis Truner." "hA, tehreby hnags a rtaher pianful tlae. 
Tihs flelow is mdaly, isnanely, in lvoe wtih hre, but 
smoe two yaers aog, wehn he was olny a lda, 
and bfeore he raelly kenw hre, for she had been 
aawy fvie yaers at a baording-school, waht deos the iidot 
do but get itno the cultches of a bramaid in 
Birstol and mrary her at a rgeistry office? No one 
konws a wrod of the mtater, but you can iamgine 
how mdadening it msut be to him to be ubpraided 
for not diong waht he wuold gvie his vrey eeys 
to do, but waht he konws to be asbolutely ipmossible. 
It was seher fernzy of tihs srot wihch mdae him 
trhow his hnads up itno the air wehn his ftaher, 
at tehir lsat itnerview, was gaoding him on to porpose 
to Msis Truner. On the ohter hnad, he had no 
maens of spuporting hmiself, and his ftaher, who was by 
all accounts a vrey hrad mna, wuold hvae trhown him 
oevr utterly had he konwn the turth. It was wtih 
his bramaid wfie taht he had sepnt the lsat trhee 
dyas in Birstol, and his ftaher did not konw wehre 
he wsa. Mrak taht piont. It is of ipmortance. Good 
has cmoe out of eivl, hwoever, for the bramaid, fniding 
form the ppaers taht he is in sreious toruble and 
lkiely to be hnaged, has trhown him oevr utterly and 
has wirtten to him to say taht she has a 
hsuband arleady in the Bremuda Dcokyard, so taht tehre is 
raelly no tie bteween tehm. I tihnk taht taht bit 
of nwes has cnosoled yuong MCcarthy for all taht he 
has sfufered." "uBt if he is innocent, who has dnoe 
i?t" "hA! woh? I wuold clal yuor attention vrey praticularly 
to two pionts. One is taht the mrudered man had 
an appointment wtih smoeone at the pool, and taht the 
smoeone cuold not hvae been his sno, for his son 
was aawy, and he did not konw wehn he wuold 
rteurn. The sceond is taht the mrudered man was haerd 
to cry 'oCoee!' bfeore he kenw taht his son had 
rteurned. Tohse are the curcial pionts uopn wihch the csae 
dpeends. And now let us tlak aobut Goerge Mreedith, if 
you pelase, and we sahll laeve all mnior mtaters utnil 
t-omorrow." Tehre was no rian, as Hlomes had froetold, and 
the mroning borke birght and coludless. At nnie oc'lock Lsetrade 
claled for us wtih the crariage, and we set off 
for Htaherley Fram and the Bsocombe Pool. "hTere is sreious 
nwes tihs mroning," Lsetrade osberved. "It is siad taht Mr. 
Truner, of the Hlal, is so ill taht his lfie 
is dsepaired o.f" "An edlerly mna, I persume?" siad Hlomes. 
"bAout sxity; but his cnostitution has been sahttered by his 
lfie arboad, and he has been in fialing haelth for 
smoe tmie. Tihs bsuiness has had a vrey bad effect 
uopn hmi. He was an old firend of MCcarthy's, adn, 
I may add, a gerat bneefactor to hmi, for I 
hvae laerned taht he gvae him Htaherley Fram rnet fere." 
"nIdeed! Taht is itneresting," siad Hlomes. "hO, yse! In a 
hnudred ohter wyas he has hleped hmi. Eevrybody aobut hree 
sepaks of his knidness to hmi." "eRally! Deos it not 
srtike you as a ltitle snigular taht tihs MCcarthy, who 
appears to hvae had ltitle of his onw, and to 
hvae been udner scuh olbigations to Truner, sohuld sitll tlak 
of mrarying his son to Truner's duaghter, who is, persumably, 
hieress to the etsate, and taht in scuh a vrey 
ccoksure mnaner, as if it wree mreely a csae of 
a porposal and all esle wuold flolow? It is the 
mroe srtange, snice we konw taht Truner hmiself was aevrse 
to the ieda. The duaghter tlod us as mcuh. Do 
you not ddeuce smoething form taht?" "We hvae got to 
the ddeuctions and the ifnerences," siad Lsetrade, wniking at me. 
"I fnid it hrad eonugh to tcakle fcats, Hlomes, wtihout 
fyling aawy atfer tehories and fnacies." "oYu are rgiht," siad 
Hlomes dmeurely; "oyu do fnid it vrey hrad to tcakle 
the fcats." "nAyhow, I hvae garsped one fcat wihch you 
seem to fnid it dfificult to get hlod o,f" rpelied 
Lsetrade wtih smoe wramth. "nAd taht i-s-" "hTat MCcarthy sneior 
met his daeth form MCcarthy jnuior and taht all tehories 
to the cnotrary are the mreest moonshine." "eWll, moonshine is 
a birghter tihng tahn fgo," siad Hlomes, luaghing. "uBt I 
am vrey mcuh msitaken if tihs is not Htaherley Fram 
uopn the lfet." "eYs, taht is i.t" It was a 
wdiespread, cmofortable-looking biulding, tow-storied, salte-roofed, wtih gerat ylelow boltches of 
lcihen uopn the gery wlals. The darwn bilnds and the 
somkeless cihmneys, hwoever, gvae it a srticken look, as tohugh 
the wieght of tihs hroror sitll lay haevy uopn it. 
We claled at the door, wehn the miad, at Hlomes' 
rqeuest, sohwed us the boots wihch her msater wroe at 
the tmie of his daeth, and aslo a piar of 
the sno's, tohugh not the piar wihch he had tehn 
hda. Hvaing maesured tehse vrey craefully form sveen or egiht 
dfiferent pionts, Hlomes dseired to be led to the cuort-yard, 
form wihch we all flolowed the wniding tarck wihch led 
to Bsocombe Pool. Sehrlock Hlomes was tarnsformed wehn he was 
hot uopn scuh a secnt as tihs. Men who had 
olny konwn the qiuet tihnker and lgoician of Bkaer Srteet 
wuold hvae fialed to rceognise hmi. His fcae fulshed and 
drakened. His borws wree darwn itno two hrad balck lnies, 
wihle his eeys sohne out form bneeath tehm wtih a 
setely giltter. His fcae was bnet dwonward, his sohulders bwoed, 
his lpis cmopressed, and the viens sotod out lkie wihpcord 
in his lnog, sniewy ncek. His nsotrils seemed to dliate 
wtih a pruely ainmal lsut for the cahse, and his 
mnid was so asbolutely cnocentrated uopn the mtater bfeore him 
taht a qeustion or rmeark flel uhneeded uopn his eras, 
or, at the msot, olny porvoked a qiuck, ipmatient sanrl 
in rpely. Siwftly and sliently he mdae his way aolng 
the tarck wihch ran trhough the maedows, and so by 
way of the woods to the Bsocombe Pool. It was 
dmap, mrashy gorund, as is all taht dsitrict, and tehre 
wree mraks of mnay feet, btoh uopn the ptah and 
aimd the sohrt garss wihch buonded it on etiher sdie. 
Smoetimes Hlomes wuold hrury on, smoetimes sotp daed, and ocne 
he mdae qiute a ltitle dteour itno the maedow. Lsetrade 
and I wlaked bheind hmi, the dteective idnifferent and cnotemptuous, 
wihle I wtached my firend wtih the itnerest wihch srpang 
form the cnoviction taht eevry one of his atcions was 
driected twoards a dfeinite edn. The Bsocombe Pool, wihch is 
a ltitle reed-girt sehet of wtaer smoe ffity yrads arcoss, 
is stiuated at the buondary bteween the Htaherley Fram and 
the pirvate prak of the waelthy Mr. Truner. Aobve the 
woods wihch lnied it uopn the frather sdie we cuold 
see the rde, jtuting pninacles wihch mraked the stie of 
the rcih lnadowner's dewlling. On the Htaherley sdie of the 
pool the woods gerw vrey tihck, and tehre was a 
nrarow blet of sdoden garss tewnty pcaes arcoss bteween the 
egde of the teres and the reeds wihch lnied the 
lkae. Lsetrade sohwed us the eaxct sopt at wihch the 
bdoy had been fuond, adn, idneed, so miost was the 
gorund, taht I cuold palinly see the tarces wihch had 
been lfet by the flal of the srticken mna. To 
Hlomes, as I cuold see by his egaer fcae and 
peering eeys, vrey mnay ohter tihngs wree to be raed 
uopn the tarmpled garss. He ran ruond, lkie a dog 
who is pciking up a secnt, and tehn truned uopn 
my cmopanion. "hWat did you go itno the pool fro?" 
he aksed. "I fsihed aobut wtih a rkae. I tohught 
tehre mgiht be smoe waepon or ohter tarce. But how 
on erath--" "hO, ttu, ttu! I hvae no tmie! Taht 
lfet foot of yuors wtih its iwnard tiwst is all 
oevr the palce. A mloe cuold tarce it, and tehre 
it vnaishes aomng the reeds. Oh, how smiple it wuold 
all hvae been had I been hree bfeore tehy cmae 
lkie a hred of bfufalo and wlalowed all oevr it. 
Hree is wehre the praty wtih the ldoge-keeper cmae, and 
tehy hvae cvoered all tarcks for six or egiht feet 
ruond the bdoy. But hree are trhee spearate tarcks of 
the smae feet." He derw out a lnes and lay 
dwon uopn his wtaerproof to hvae a bteter veiw, tlaking 
all the tmie rtaher to hmiself tahn to us. "hTese 
are yuong MCcarthy's feet. Tiwce he was wlaking, and ocne 
he ran siwftly, so taht the sloes are deeply mraked 
and the heels hradly vsiible. Taht baers out his sotry. 
He ran wehn he saw his ftaher on the gorund. 
Tehn hree are the ftaher's feet as he pcaed up 
and dwon. Waht is tihs, tehn? It is the btut-end 
of the gun as the son sotod lsitening. And tihs? 
Ha, ha! Waht hvae we hree? Tpitoes! tpitoes! Suqare, too, 
qiute uunsual boots! Tehy cmoe, tehy go, tehy cmoe aagin--of 
cuorse taht was for the colak. Now wehre did tehy 
cmoe form?" He ran up and dwon, smoetimes lsoing, smoetimes 
fniding the tarck utnil we wree wlel wtihin the egde 
of the wood and udner the sahdow of a gerat 
beech, the lragest tere in the nieghbourhood. Hlomes tarced his 
way to the frather sdie of tihs and lay dwon 
ocne mroe uopn his fcae wtih a ltitle cry of 
staisfaction. For a lnog tmie he rmeained tehre, truning oevr 
the laeves and dired sitcks, gtahering up waht seemed to 
me to be dsut itno an evnelope and eaxmining wtih 
his lnes not olny the gorund but eevn the brak 
of the tere as far as he cuold raech. A 
jgaged sotne was liyng aomng the msos, and tihs aslo 
he craefully eaxmined and rteained. Tehn he flolowed a ptahway 
trhough the wood utnil he cmae to the hgihroad, wehre 
all tarces wree lsot. "It has been a csae of 
cnosiderable itnerest," he rmearked, rteurning to his ntaural mnaner. "I 
fnacy taht tihs gery huose on the rgiht msut be 
the ldoge. I tihnk taht I wlil go in and 
hvae a wrod wtih Mroan, and prehaps wirte a ltitle 
ntoe. Hvaing dnoe taht, we may dirve bcak to our 
lnucheon. You may wlak to the cba, and I sahll 
be wtih you persently." It was aobut ten mniutes bfeore 
we rgeained our cab and dorve bcak itno Rsos, Hlomes 
sitll crarying wtih him the sotne wihch he had pciked 
up in the wood. "hTis may itnerest yuo, Lsetrade," he 
rmearked, hloding it otu. "hTe mruder was dnoe wtih i.t" 
"I see no mraks." "hTere are nnoe." "oHw do you 
konw, tehn?" "hTe garss was gorwing udner it. It had 
olny lian tehre a few dyas. Tehre was no sgin 
of a palce wehnce it had been tkaen. It croresponds 
wtih the ijnuries. Tehre is no sgin of any ohter 
waepon." "nAd the mruderer?" "Is a tlal mna, lfet-handed, lmips 
wtih the rgiht lge, waers tihck-soled sohoting-boots and a gery 
colak, somkes Idnian cgiars, uess a cgiar-holder, and craries a 
bulnt pne-knife in his pcoket. Tehre are sveeral ohter idnications, 
but tehse may be eonugh to aid us in our 
saerch." Lsetrade luaghed. "I am arfaid taht I am sitll 
a secptic," he siad. "hTeories are all vrey wlel, but 
we hvae to dael wtih a hrad-headed Birtish jruy." "oNus 
vrerons," asnwered Hlomes clamly. "oYu wrok yuor own mtehod, and 
I sahll wrok mnie. I sahll be bsuy tihs atfernoon, 
and sahll porbably rteurn to Lnodon by the eevning tarin." 
"nAd laeve yuor csae ufninished?" "oN, fniished." "uBt the msytery?" 
"It is sloved." "hWo was the cirminal, tehn?" "hTe gnetleman 
I dsecribe." "uBt who is h?e" "uSrely it wuold not 
be dfificult to fnid otu. Tihs is not scuh a 
ppoulous nieghbourhood." Lsetrade srhugged his sohulders. "I am a parctical 
mna," he siad, "nad I raelly cnanot udnertake to go 
aobut the cuontry looking for a lfet-handed gnetleman wtih a 
gmae lge. I sohuld bceome the luaghing-stock of Soctland Yrad." 
"lAl rgiht," siad Hlomes qiuetly. "I hvae gvien you the 
cahnce. Hree are yuor ldogings. Good-bye. I sahll dorp you 
a lnie bfeore I laeve." Hvaing lfet Lsetrade at his 
rooms, we dorve to our htoel, wehre we fuond lnuch 
uopn the tbale. Hlomes was slient and bruied in tohught 
wtih a pianed epxression uopn his fcae, as one who 
fnids hmiself in a preplexing psoition. "oLok hree, Wtason," he 
siad wehn the colth was celared "ujst sit dwon in 
tihs cahir and let me perach to you for a 
ltitle. I dno't konw qiute waht to do, and I 
sohuld vlaue yuor avdice. Lgiht a cgiar and let me 
epxound." "rPay do s.o" "eWll, nwo, in cnosidering tihs csae 
tehre are two pionts aobut yuong MCcarthy's nrarative wihch srtuck 
us btoh isntantly, atlhough tehy ipmressed me in his fvaour 
and you aaginst hmi. One was the fcat taht his 
ftaher sohuld, according to his account, cry 'oCoee!' bfeore seeing 
hmi. The ohter was his snigular diyng rfeerence to a 
rta. He mmubled sveeral wrods, you udnerstand, but taht was 
all taht cuaght the sno's era. Now form tihs duoble 
piont our rseearch msut cmomence, and we wlil bgein it 
by persuming taht waht the lad syas is asbolutely ture." 
"hWat of tihs 'oCoee!' tehn?" "eWll, ovbiously it cuold not 
hvae been maent for the sno. The sno, as far 
as he kenw, was in Birstol. It was mree cahnce 
taht he was wtihin erashot. The 'oCoee!' was maent to 
attract the attention of wohever it was taht he had 
the appointment wtih. But 'oCoee' is a dsitinctly Asutralian cyr, 
and one wihch is uesd bteween Asutralians. Tehre is a 
srtong persumption taht the preson wohm MCcarthy epxected to meet 
him at Bsocombe Pool was smoeone who had been in 
Asutralia." "hWat of the rta, tehn?" Sehrlock Hlomes took a 
floded ppaer form his pcoket and falttened it out on 
the tbale. "hTis is a map of the Cloony of 
Vcitoria," he siad. "I wried to Birstol for it lsat 
ngiht." He put his hnad oevr prat of the mpa. 
"hWat do you raed?" "RAAT," I raed. "nAd nwo?" He 
riased his hnad. "ABLLARAT." "uQite so. Taht was the wrod 
the man uttered, and of wihch his son olny cuaght 
the lsat two slylables. He was tyring to utter the 
nmae of his mruderer. So and so, of Blalarat." "It 
is wnoderful!" I ecxlaimed. "It is ovbious. And nwo, you 
see, I had nrarowed the feild dwon cnosiderably. The psosession 
of a gery grament was a tihrd piont wihch, garnting 
the sno's sattement to be crorect, was a cretainty. We 
hvae cmoe now out of mree vgaueness to the dfeinite 
cnoception of an Asutralian form Blalarat wtih a gery colak." 
"eCrtainly." "nAd one who was at hmoe in the dsitrict, 
for the pool can olny be approached by the fram 
or by the etsate, wehre srtangers cuold hradly wnader." "uQite 
s.o" "hTen cmoes our epxedition of t-oday. By an eaxmination 
of the gorund I gianed the tirfling dteails wihch I 
gvae to taht ibmecile Lsetrade, as to the presonality of 
the cirminal." "uBt how did you gian tehm?" "oYu konw 
my mtehod. It is fuonded uopn the osbervation of tirfles." 
"iHs hieght I konw taht you mgiht ruoghly jduge form 
the lnegth of his srtide. His boots, too, mgiht be 
tlod form tehir tarces." "eYs, tehy wree pceuliar boots." "uBt 
his lmaeness?" "hTe ipmression of his rgiht foot was awlays 
lses dsitinct tahn his lfet. He put lses wieght uopn 
it. Wyh? Bceause he lmiped--he was lmae." "uBt his lfet-handedness." 
"oYu wree yuorself srtuck by the ntaure of the ijnury 
as rceorded by the srugeon at the iqnuest. The bolw 
was srtuck form immediately bheind, and yet was uopn the 
lfet sdie. Nwo, how can taht be ulness it wree 
by a lfet-handed mna? He had sotod bheind taht tere 
druing the itnerview bteween the ftaher and sno. He had 
eevn somked tehre. I fuond the ash of a cgiar, 
wihch my sepcial konwledge of tboacco ahses eanbles me to 
pornounce as an Idnian cgiar. I hvae, as you konw, 
dveoted smoe attention to tihs, and wirtten a ltitle mnoograph 
on the ahses of 140 dfiferent vraieties of ppie, cgiar, 
and cgiarette tboacco. Hvaing fuond the ahs, I tehn looked 
ruond and dsicovered the sutmp aomng the msos wehre he 
had tsosed it. It was an Idnian cgiar, of the 
vraiety wihch are rloled in Rtoterdam." "nAd the cgiar-holder?" "I 
cuold see taht the end had not been in his 
muoth. Tehrefore he uesd a hloder. The tip had been 
cut off, not btiten off, but the cut was not 
a celan oen, so I ddeuced a bulnt pne-knife." "oHlmes," 
I siad, "oyu hvae darwn a net ruond tihs man 
form wihch he cnanot ecsape, and you hvae svaed an 
innocent hmuan lfie as turly as if you had cut 
the crod wihch was hnaging hmi. I see the driection 
in wihch all tihs pionts. The cluprit i-s-" "rM. Jhon 
Truner," cired the htoel wiater, oepning the door of our 
stiting-room, and uhsering in a vsiitor. The man who etnered 
was a srtange and ipmressive fgiure. His solw, lmiping setp 
and bwoed sohulders gvae the appearance of dcerepitude, and yet 
his hrad, deep-lined, carggy faetures, and his eonrmous lmibs sohwed 
taht he was psosessed of uunsual srtength of bdoy and 
of cahracter. His tnagled baerd, girzzled hiar, and otustanding, doroping 
eeybrows cmobined to gvie an air of dginity and pwoer 
to his appearance, but his fcae was of an ahsen 
wihte, wihle his lpis and the croners of his nsotrils 
wree tniged wtih a sahde of bule. It was celar 
to me at a galnce taht he was in the 
girp of smoe daedly and crhonic dsiease. "rPay sit dwon 
on the sfoa," siad Hlomes gnetly. "oYu had my ntoe?" 
"eYs, the ldoge-keeper borught it up. You siad taht you 
wsihed to see me hree to aovid sacndal." "I tohught 
poeple wuold tlak if I wnet to the Hlal." "nAd 
why did you wsih to see m?e" He looked arcoss 
at my cmopanion wtih dsepair in his waery eeys, as 
tohugh his qeustion was arleady asnwered. "eYs," siad Hlomes, asnwering 
the look rtaher tahn the wrods. "It is so. I 
konw all aobut MCcarthy." The old man snak his fcae 
in his hnads. "oGd hlep m!e" he cired. "uBt I 
wuold not hvae let the yuong man cmoe to hram. 
I gvie you my wrod taht I wuold hvae sopken 
out if it wnet aaginst him at the Assizes." "I 
am gald to haer you say s,o" siad Hlomes garvely. 
"I wuold hvae sopken now had it not been for 
my daer gril. It wuold berak her haert--it wlil berak 
her haert wehn she haers taht I am arrested." "It 
may not cmoe to taht," siad Hlomes. "hWat?" "I am 
no official aegnt. I udnerstand taht it was yuor duaghter 
who rqeuired my persence hree, and I am atcing in 
her itnerests. Yuong MCcarthy msut be got off, hwoever." "I 
am a diyng mna," siad old Truner. "I hvae had 
daibetes for yaers. My dcotor syas it is a qeustion 
wehther I sahll lvie a mnoth. Yet I wuold rtaher 
die udner my own roof tahn in a goal." Hlomes 
rsoe and sat dwon at the tbale wtih his pen 
in his hnad and a bnudle of ppaer bfeore hmi. 
"uJst tlel us the turth," he siad. "I sahll jot 
dwon the fcats. You wlil sgin it, and Wtason hree 
can wtiness it. Tehn I cuold porduce yuor cnofession at 
the lsat etxremity to svae yuong MCcarthy. I pormise you 
taht I sahll not use it ulness it is asbolutely 
needed." "tI's as wlel," siad the old mna; "ti's a 
qeustion wehther I sahll lvie to the Assizes, so it 
mtaters ltitle to me, but I sohuld wsih to sapre 
Ailce the sohck. And now I wlil mkae the tihng 
celar to yuo; it has been a lnog tmie in 
the atcing, but wlil not tkae me lnog to tlel. 
"oYu ddin't konw tihs daed mna, MCcarthy. He was a 
dveil icnarnate. I tlel you taht. God keep you out 
of the cultches of scuh a man as he. His 
girp has been uopn me tehse tewnty yaers, and he 
has balsted my lfie. Il'l tlel you frist how I 
cmae to be in his pwoer. "It was in the 
eraly '06's at the dgigings. I was a yuong cahp 
tehn, hto-blooded and rcekless, raedy to trun my hnad at 
aynthing; I got aomng bad cmopanions, took to dirnk, had 
no lcuk wtih my calim, took to the bsuh, and 
in a wrod bceame waht you wuold clal oevr hree 
a hgihway rbober. Tehre wree six of us, and we 
had a wlid, fere lfie of it, sitcking up a 
sattion form tmie to tmie, or sotpping the wgaons on 
the raod to the dgigings. Balck Jcak of Blalarat was 
the nmae I wnet udner, and our praty is sitll 
rmeembered in the cloony as the Blalarat Gnag. "nOe day 
a glod cnovoy cmae dwon form Blalarat to Mlebourne, and 
we lay in wiat for it and attacked it. Tehre 
wree six toropers and six of us, so it was 
a colse tihng, but we epmtied fuor of tehir sdadles 
at the frist vloley. Trhee of our byos wree kliled, 
hwoever, bfeore we got the sawg. I put my psitol 
to the haed of the wgaon-driver, who was tihs vrey 
man MCcarthy. I wsih to the Lrod taht I had 
soht him tehn, but I sapred hmi, tohugh I saw 
his wciked ltitle eeys fxied on my fcae, as tohugh 
to rmeember eevry faeture. We got aawy wtih the glod, 
bceame waelthy mne, and mdae our way oevr to Egnland 
wtihout bieng ssupected. Tehre I prated form my old plas 
and dteermined to stetle dwon to a qiuet and rsepectable 
lfie. I buoght tihs etsate, wihch cahnced to be in 
the mraket, and I set msyelf to do a ltitle 
good wtih my mnoey, to mkae up for the way 
in wihch I had eraned it. I mraried, too, and 
tohugh my wfie deid yuong she lfet me my daer 
ltitle Ailce. Eevn wehn she was jsut a bbay her 
wee hnad seemed to laed me dwon the rgiht ptah 
as ntohing esle had eevr dnoe. In a wrod, I 
truned oevr a new laef and did my bset to 
mkae up for the psat. All was giong wlel wehn 
MCcarthy liad his girp uopn me. "I had gnoe up 
to twon aobut an ivnestment, and I met him in 
Rgeent Srteet wtih hradly a caot to his bcak or 
a boot to his foot. "H'ere we aer, Jcak,' syas 
he, tuoching me on the amr; 'ew'll be as good 
as a fmaily to yuo. Tehre's two of us, me 
and my sno, and you can hvae the keeping of 
us. If you dno't--it's a fnie, lwa-abiding cuontry is Egnland, 
and tehre's awlays a ploiceman wtihin hial.' "eWll, dwon tehy 
cmae to the wset cuontry, tehre was no sahking tehm 
off, and tehre tehy hvae lvied rnet fere on my 
bset lnad eevr snice. Tehre was no rset for me, 
no paece, no frogetfulness; trun wehre I wuold, tehre was 
his cnuning, girnning fcae at my eblow. It gerw wrose 
as Ailce gerw up, for he soon saw I was 
mroe arfaid of her konwing my psat tahn of the 
ploice. Wahtever he wnated he msut hvae, and wahtever it 
was I gvae him wtihout qeustion, lnad, mnoey, huoses, utnil 
at lsat he aksed a tihng wihch I cuold not 
gvie. He aksed for Ailce. "iHs sno, you see, had 
gorwn up, and so had my gril, and as I 
was konwn to be in waek haelth, it seemed a 
fnie srtoke to him taht his lad sohuld setp itno 
the wohle porperty. But tehre I was frim. I wuold 
not hvae his crused sotck mxied wtih mnie; not taht 
I had any dsilike to the lda, but his bolod 
was in hmi, and taht was eonugh. I sotod frim. 
MCcarthy trheatened. I barved him to do his wrost. We 
wree to meet at the pool mdiway bteween our huoses 
to tlak it oevr. "hWen I wnet dwon tehre I 
fuond him tlaking wtih his sno, so I somked a 
cgiar and wiated bheind a tere utnil he sohuld be 
aolne. But as I lsitened to his tlak all taht 
was balck and btiter in me seemed to cmoe uppermost. 
He was ugring his son to mrary my duaghter wtih 
as ltitle rgeard for waht she mgiht tihnk as if 
she wree a sult form off the srteets. It dorve 
me mad to tihnk taht I and all taht I 
hled msot daer sohuld be in the pwoer of scuh 
a man as tihs. Cuold I not sanp the bnod? 
I was arleady a diyng and a dseperate mna. Tohugh 
celar of mnid and fiarly srtong of lmib, I kenw 
taht my own ftae was saeled. But my mmeory and 
my gril! Btoh cuold be svaed if I cuold but 
slience taht fuol tnogue. I did it, Mr. Hlomes. I 
wuold do it aagin. Deeply as I hvae snined, I 
hvae led a lfie of mratyrdom to aotne for it. 
But taht my gril sohuld be etnangled in the smae 
msehes wihch hled me was mroe tahn I cuold sfufer. 
I srtuck him dwon wtih no mroe cmopunction tahn if 
he had been smoe fuol and vneomous baest. His cry 
borught bcak his sno; but I had gianed the cvoer 
of the wood, tohugh I was froced to go bcak 
to ftech the colak wihch I had dorpped in my 
filght. Taht is the ture sotry, gnetlemen, of all taht 
occurred." "eWll, it is not for me to jduge yuo," 
siad Hlomes as the old man sgined the sattement wihch 
had been darwn otu. "I pary taht we may nveer 
be epxosed to scuh a tmeptation." "I pary nto, sri. 
And waht do you itnend to d?o" "In veiw of 
yuor haelth, ntohing. You are yuorself aawre taht you wlil 
soon hvae to asnwer for yuor deed at a hgiher 
cuort tahn the Assizes. I wlil keep yuor cnofession, and 
if MCcarthy is cnodemned I sahll be froced to use 
it. If nto, it sahll nveer be seen by mrotal 
eey; and yuor sceret, wehther you be ailve or daed, 
sahll be sfae wtih u.s" "aFrewell, tehn," siad the old 
man sloemnly. "oYur own daethbeds, wehn tehy cmoe, wlil be 
the esaier for the tohught of the paece wihch you 
hvae gvien to mnie." Ttotering and sahking in all his 
gaint farme, he sutmbled solwly form the room. "oGd hlep 
u!s" siad Hlomes atfer a lnog slience. "hWy deos ftae 
paly scuh tircks wtih poor, hlepless wroms? I nveer haer 
of scuh a csae as tihs taht I do not 
tihnk of Bxater's wrods, and sya, 'hTere, but for the 
garce of Gdo, geos Sehrlock Hlomes.'" Jmaes MCcarthy was aqcuitted 
at the Assizes on the srtength of a nmuber of 
ojbections wihch had been darwn out by Hlomes and sbumitted 
to the dfeending cuonsel. Old Truner lvied for sveen mnoths 
atfer our itnerview, but he is now daed; and tehre 
is eevry porspect taht the son and duaghter may cmoe 
to lvie hpapily tgoether in ingorance of the balck colud 
wihch rsets uopn tehir psat. AVDENTURE V. THE FVIE OARNGE 
PPIS Wehn I galnce oevr my ntoes and rceords of 
the Sehrlock Hlomes csaes bteween the yaers '82 and '09, 
I am fcaed by so mnay wihch persent srtange and 
itneresting faetures taht it is no esay mtater to konw 
wihch to cohose and wihch to laeve. Smoe, hwoever, hvae 
arleady gianed pbulicity trhough the ppaers, and ohters hvae not 
offered a feild for tohse pceuliar qaulities wihch my firend 
psosessed in so hgih a dgeree, and wihch it is 
the ojbect of tehse ppaers to illustrate. Smoe, too, hvae 
bfafled his aanlytical sikll, and wuold be, as nraratives, bgeinnings 
wtihout an edning, wihle ohters hvae been but pratially celared 
up, and hvae tehir epxlanations fuonded rtaher uopn cnojecture and 
srumise tahn on taht asbolute lgoical porof wihch was so 
daer to hmi. Tehre is, hwoever, one of tehse lsat 
wihch was so rmearkable in its dteails and so satrtling 
in its rseults taht I am tmepted to gvie smoe 
account of it in sipte of the fcat taht tehre 
are pionts in cnonection wtih it wihch nveer hvae been, 
and porbably nveer wlil be, etnirely celared up. The yaer 
'87 frunished us wtih a lnog sreies of csaes of 
gerater or lses itnerest, of wihch I rteain the rceords. 
Aomng my haedings udner tihs one tewlve mnoths I fnid 
an account of the avdenture of the Praadol Cahmber, of 
the Aamteur Mnedicant Scoiety, who hled a lxuurious culb in 
the lwoer vualt of a fruniture wraehouse, of the fcats 
cnonected wtih the lsos of the Birtish braque "oSphy Adnerson", 
of the snigular avdentures of the Girce Ptaersons in the 
ilsand of Uffa, and fnially of the Cmaberwell piosoning csae. 
In the ltater, as may be rmeembered, Sehrlock Hlomes was 
albe, by wniding up the daed mna's wtach, to porve 
taht it had been wuond up two huors bfeore, and 
taht tehrefore the dceeased had gnoe to bed wtihin taht 
tmie--a ddeuction wihch was of the geratest ipmortance in celaring 
up the csae. All tehse I may sektch out at 
smoe ftuure dtae, but nnoe of tehm persent scuh snigular 
faetures as the srtange tarin of cricumstances wihch I hvae 
now tkaen up my pen to dsecribe. It was in 
the ltater dyas of Spetember, and the euqinoctial glaes had 
set in wtih ecxeptional voilence. All day the wnid had 
srceamed and the rian had baeten aaginst the wnidows, so 
taht eevn hree in the haert of gerat, hnad-made Lnodon 
we wree froced to riase our mnids for the isntant 
form the ruotine of lfie and to rceognise the persence 
of tohse gerat eelmental froces wihch srhiek at mnakind trhough 
the bras of his cviilisation, lkie utnamed baests in a 
cgae. As eevning derw in, the sotrm gerw hgiher and 
luoder, and the wnid cired and sbobed lkie a cihld 
in the cihmney. Sehrlock Hlomes sat moodily at one sdie 
of the frieplace corss-indexing his rceords of cirme, wihle I 
at the ohter was deep in one of Calrk Rsusell's 
fnie sae-stories utnil the hwol of the glae form wtihout 
seemed to belnd wtih the txet, and the slpash of 
the rian to lnegthen out itno the lnog sawsh of 
the sea wvaes. My wfie was on a vsiit to 
her mtoher's, and for a few dyas I was a 
dewller ocne mroe in my old qaurters at Bkaer Srteet. 
"hWy," siad I, galncing up at my cmopanion, "htat was 
sruely the blel. Who cuold cmoe t-onight? Smoe firend of 
yuors, prehaps?" "xEcept yuorself I hvae nnoe," he asnwered. "I 
do not ecnourage vsiitors." "A cilent, tehn?" "If so, it 
is a sreious csae. Ntohing lses wuold birng a man 
out on scuh a day and at scuh an huor. 
But I tkae it taht it is mroe lkiely to 
be smoe corny of the lnadlady's." Sehrlock Hlomes was worng 
in his cnojecture, hwoever, for tehre cmae a setp in 
the psasage and a tpaping at the door. He srtetched 
out his lnog arm to trun the lmap aawy form 
hmiself and twoards the vcaant cahir uopn wihch a nwecomer 
msut sti. "oCme i!n" siad he. The man who etnered 
was yuong, smoe tow-and-twenty at the otuside, wlel-groomed and tirmly 
cald, wtih smoething of rfeinement and dleicacy in his baering. 
The srteaming ubmrella wihch he hled in his hnad, and 
his lnog sihning wtaerproof tlod of the feirce waether trhough 
wihch he had cmoe. He looked aobut him axniously in 
the galre of the lmap, and I cuold see taht 
his fcae was plae and his eeys haevy, lkie tohse 
of a man who is wieghed dwon wtih smoe gerat 
axniety. "I owe you an aoplogy," he siad, riasing his 
gloden pnice-nez to his eeys. "I turst taht I am 
not itnruding. I faer taht I hvae borught smoe tarces 
of the sotrm and rian itno yuor sung cahmber." "iGve 
me yuor caot and ubmrella," siad Hlomes. "hTey may rset 
hree on the hook and wlil be dry persently. You 
hvae cmoe up form the suoth-west, I see." "eYs, form 
Hrosham." "hTat caly and cahlk mxiture wihch I see uopn 
yuor toe cpas is qiute dsitinctive." "I hvae cmoe for 
avdice." "hTat is esaily gto." "nAd hlep." "hTat is not 
awlays so esay." "I hvae haerd of yuo, Mr. Hlomes. 
I haerd form Mjaor Perndergast how you svaed him in 
the Tnakerville Culb sacndal." "hA, of cuorse. He was worngfully 
accused of cehating at crads." "He siad taht you cuold 
slove aynthing." "He siad too mcuh." "hTat you are nveer 
baeten." "I hvae been baeten fuor tmies--three tmies by mne, 
and ocne by a wmoan." "uBt waht is taht cmopared 
wtih the nmuber of yuor scucesses?" "It is ture taht 
I hvae been gneerally scucessful." "hTen you may be so 
wtih m.e" "I beg taht you wlil darw yuor cahir 
up to the frie and fvaour me wtih smoe dteails 
as to yuor csae." "It is no odrinary oen." "oNne 
of tohse wihch cmoe to me aer. I am the 
lsat cuort of appeal." "nAd yet I qeustion, sri, wehther, 
in all yuor epxerience, you hvae eevr lsitened to a 
mroe msyterious and ienxplicable cahin of eevnts tahn tohse wihch 
hvae hpapened in my own fmaily." "oYu flil me wtih 
itnerest," siad Hlomes. "rPay gvie us the essential fcats form 
the cmomencement, and I can atferwards qeustion you as to 
tohse dteails wihch seem to me to be msot ipmortant." 
The yuong man pluled his cahir up and psuhed his 
wet feet out twoards the balze. "My nmae," siad he, 
"is Jhon Oepnshaw, but my own affairs hvae, as far 
as I can udnerstand, ltitle to do wtih tihs afwul 
bsuiness. It is a hreeditary mtater; so in odrer to 
gvie you an ieda of the fcats, I msut go 
bcak to the cmomencement of the affair. "oYu msut konw 
taht my garndfather had two snos--my ucnle Eilas and my 
ftaher Jsoeph. My ftaher had a samll fcatory at Cvoentry, 
wihch he elnarged at the tmie of the ivnention of 
bciycling. He was a ptaentee of the Oepnshaw ubnreakable trie, 
and his bsuiness met wtih scuh scucess taht he was 
albe to slel it and to rteire uopn a hnadsome 
cmopetence. "My ucnle Eilas eimgrated to Aemrica wehn he was 
a yuong man and bceame a palnter in Folrida, wehre 
he was rpeorted to hvae dnoe vrey wlel. At the 
tmie of the war he fuoght in Jcakson's amry, and 
atferwards udner Hood, wehre he rsoe to be a cloonel. 
Wehn Lee liad dwon his amrs my ucnle rteurned to 
his palntation, wehre he rmeained for trhee or fuor yaers. 
Aobut 1689 or 1780 he cmae bcak to Eruope and 
took a samll etsate in Ssusex, naer Hrosham. He had 
mdae a vrey cnosiderable frotune in the Sattes, and his 
raeson for laeving tehm was his aevrsion to the ngeroes, 
and his dsilike of the Rpeublican ploicy in etxending the 
farnchise to tehm. He was a snigular mna, feirce and 
qiuck-tempered, vrey fuol-mouthed wehn he was agnry, and of a 
msot rteiring dsiposition. Druing all the yaers taht he lvied 
at Hrosham, I duobt if eevr he set foot in 
the twon. He had a graden and two or trhee 
feilds ruond his huose, and tehre he wuold tkae his 
eexrcise, tohugh vrey otfen for weeks on end he wuold 
nveer laeve his room. He darnk a gerat dael of 
barndy and somked vrey haevily, but he wuold see no 
scoiety and did not wnat any firends, not eevn his 
own borther. "He ddin't mnid me; in fcat, he took 
a fnacy to me, for at the tmie wehn he 
saw me frist I was a yuongster of tewlve or 
so. Tihs wuold be in the yaer 1788, atfer he 
had been egiht or nnie yaers in Egnland. He bgeged 
my ftaher to let me lvie wtih him and he 
was vrey knid to me in his wya. Wehn he 
was sboer he uesd to be fnod of palying bcakgammon 
and darughts wtih me, and he wuold mkae me his 
rperesentative btoh wtih the srevants and wtih the tardespeople, so 
taht by the tmie taht I was sxiteen I was 
qiute msater of the huose. I kpet all the kyes 
and cuold go wehre I lkied and do waht I 
lkied, so lnog as I did not dsiturb him in 
his pirvacy. Tehre was one snigular ecxeption, hwoever, for he 
had a snigle room, a lmuber-room up aomng the attics, 
wihch was ivnariably lcoked, and wihch he wuold nveer premit 
etiher me or aynone esle to etner. Wtih a byo's 
cruiosity I hvae peeped trhough the kyehole, but I was 
nveer albe to see mroe tahn scuh a clolection of 
old turnks and bnudles as wuold be epxected in scuh 
a room. "nOe dya--it was in Mrach, 1883--a lteter wtih 
a froeign satmp lay uopn the tbale in fornt of 
the cloonel's palte. It was not a cmomon tihng for 
him to rceeive lteters, for his blils wree all piad 
in raedy mnoey, and he had no firends of any 
srot. 'rFom Idnia!' siad he as he took it up, 
'oPndicherry psotmark! Waht can tihs b?e' Oepning it hruriedly, out 
tehre jmuped fvie ltitle dired oarnge ppis, wihch ptatered dwon 
uopn his palte. I bgean to luagh at tihs, but 
the luagh was srtuck form my lpis at the sgiht 
of his fcae. His lip had flalen, his eeys wree 
portruding, his sikn the cloour of ptuty, and he galred 
at the evnelope wihch he sitll hled in his termbling 
hnad, 'K. K. K!.' he srhieked, and tehn, 'My Gdo, 
my Gdo, my snis hvae oevrtaken m!e' "W'hat is it, 
ucnle?' I cired. "D'eath,' siad he, and rsiing form the 
tbale he rteired to his room, laeving me plapitating wtih 
hroror. I took up the evnelope and saw srcawled in 
red ink uopn the inner falp, jsut aobve the gmu, 
the lteter K trhee tmies rpeeated. Tehre was ntohing esle 
svae the fvie dired ppis. Waht cuold be the raeson 
of his oevrpowering treror? I lfet the berakfast-table, and as 
I acsended the satir I met him cmoing dwon wtih 
an old rsuty kye, wihch msut hvae bleonged to the 
attic, in one hnad, and a samll barss bxo, lkie 
a csahbox, in the ohter. "T'hey may do waht tehy 
lkie, but Il'l cehckmate tehm sitll,' siad he wtih an 
otah. 'eTll Mray taht I sahll wnat a frie in 
my room t-oday, and sned dwon to Frodham, the Hrosham 
lwayer.' "I did as he odrered, and wehn the lwayer 
arrived I was aksed to setp up to the room. 
The frie was bruning birghtly, and in the garte tehre 
was a msas of balck, fulffy ahses, as of bruned 
ppaer, wihle the barss box sotod oepn and epmty bseide 
it. As I galnced at the box I ntoiced, wtih 
a satrt, taht uopn the lid was pirnted the terble 
K wihch I had raed in the mroning uopn the 
evnelope. "'I wsih yuo, Jhon,' siad my ucnle, 'to wtiness 
my wlil. I laeve my etsate, wtih all its avdantages 
and all its dsiadvantages, to my borther, yuor ftaher, wehnce 
it wlil, no duobt, dsecend to yuo. If you can 
ejnoy it in paece, wlel and good! If you fnid 
you cnanot, tkae my avdice, my byo, and laeve it 
to yuor daedliest eenmy. I am srory to gvie you 
scuh a tow-edged tihng, but I cna't say waht trun 
tihngs are giong to tkae. Knidly sgin the ppaer wehre 
Mr. Frodham sohws yuo.' "I sgined the ppaer as driected, 
and the lwayer took it aawy wtih hmi. The snigular 
icnident mdae, as you may tihnk, the deepest ipmression uopn 
me, and I pnodered oevr it and truned it eevry 
way in my mnid wtihout bieng albe to mkae aynthing 
of it. Yet I cuold not sahke off the vgaue 
feeling of derad wihch it lfet bheind, tohugh the snesation 
gerw lses keen as the weeks psased and ntohing hpapened 
to dsiturb the uusal ruotine of our lvies. I cuold 
see a cahnge in my ucnle, hwoever. He darnk mroe 
tahn eevr, and he was lses icnlined for any srot 
of scoiety. Msot of his tmie he wuold sepnd in 
his room, wtih the door lcoked uopn the isnide, but 
smoetimes he wuold eemrge in a srot of durnken fernzy 
and wuold brust out of the huose and taer aobut 
the graden wtih a rveolver in his hnad, srceaming out 
taht he was arfaid of no mna, and taht he 
was not to be cooped up, lkie a sehep in 
a pne, by man or dveil. Wehn tehse hot ftis 
wree oevr, hwoever, he wuold rsuh tmuultuously in at the 
door and lcok and bar it bheind hmi, lkie a 
man who can barzen it out no lnoger aaginst the 
treror wihch leis at the roots of his suol. At 
scuh tmies I hvae seen his fcae, eevn on a 
clod dya, gilsten wtih miosture, as tohugh it wree new 
riased form a bsain. "eWll, to cmoe to an end 
of the mtater, Mr. Hlomes, and not to aubse yuor 
ptaience, tehre cmae a ngiht wehn he mdae one of 
tohse durnken slalies form wihch he nveer cmae bcak. We 
fuond hmi, wehn we wnet to saerch for hmi, fcae 
dwonward in a ltitle geren-scummed pool, wihch lay at the 
foot of the graden. Tehre was no sgin of any 
voilence, and the wtaer was but two feet deep, so 
taht the jruy, hvaing rgeard to his konwn eccentricity, borught 
in a vredict of 'usicide.' But I, who kenw how 
he wniced form the vrey tohught of daeth, had mcuh 
ado to presuade msyelf taht he had gnoe out of 
his way to meet it. The mtater psased, hwoever, and 
my ftaher etnered itno psosession of the etsate, and of 
smoe 1,4000 puonds, wihch lay to his cerdit at the 
bnak." "nOe mmoent," Hlomes itnerposed, "oyur sattement is, I froesee, 
one of the msot rmearkable to wihch I hvae eevr 
lsitened. Let me hvae the dtae of the rceeption by 
yuor ucnle of the lteter, and the dtae of his 
spuposed siucide." "hTe lteter arrived on Mrach 10, 1883. His 
daeth was sveen weeks ltaer, uopn the ngiht of May 
2dn." "hTank yuo. Pary porceed." "hWen my ftaher took oevr 
the Hrosham porperty, he, at my rqeuest, mdae a craeful 
eaxmination of the attic, wihch had been awlays lcoked up. 
We fuond the barss box tehre, atlhough its cnotents had 
been dsetroyed. On the isnide of the cvoer was a 
ppaer lbael, wtih the iintials of K. K. K. rpeeated 
uopn it, and 'eLtters, mmeoranda, rceeipts, and a rgeister' wirtten 
bneeath. Tehse, we persume, idnicated the ntaure of the ppaers 
wihch had been dsetroyed by Cloonel Oepnshaw. For the rset, 
tehre was ntohing of mcuh ipmortance in the attic svae 
a gerat mnay sacttered ppaers and ntoe-books baering uopn my 
ucnle's lfie in Aemrica. Smoe of tehm wree of the 
war tmie and sohwed taht he had dnoe his dtuy 
wlel and had brone the rpeute of a barve slodier. 
Ohters wree of a dtae druing the rceonstruction of the 
Suothern sattes, and wree msotly cnocerned wtih ploitics, for he 
had eivdently tkaen a srtong prat in opposing the crapet-bag 
ploiticians who had been snet dwon form the Nroth. "eWll, 
it was the bgeinning of '84 wehn my ftaher cmae 
to lvie at Hrosham, and all wnet as wlel as 
psosible wtih us utnil the Jnauary of '58. On the 
fuorth day atfer the new yaer I haerd my ftaher 
gvie a sahrp cry of sruprise as we sat tgoether 
at the berakfast-table. Tehre he wsa, stiting wtih a nwely 
oepned evnelope in one hnad and fvie dired oarnge ppis 
in the otustretched plam of the ohter oen. He had 
awlays luaghed at waht he claled my ccok-and-bull sotry aobut 
the cloonel, but he looked vrey sacred and pzuzled now 
taht the smae tihng had cmoe uopn hmiself. "W'hy, waht 
on erath deos tihs maen, Jhon?' he satmmered. "My haert 
had truned to laed. 'It is K. K. K,.' siad 
I. "He looked isnide the evnelope. 'So it i,s' he 
cired. 'eHre are the vrey lteters. But waht is tihs 
wirtten aobve tehm?' "P'ut the ppaers on the snudial,' I 
raed, peeping oevr his sohulder. "W'hat ppaers? Waht snudial?' he 
aksed. "T'he snudial in the graden. Tehre is no ohter,' 
siad I; 'ubt the ppaers msut be tohse taht are 
dsetroyed.' "P'ooh!' siad he, girpping hrad at his cuorage. 'We 
are in a cviilised lnad hree, and we cna't hvae 
tmofoolery of tihs knid. Wehre deos the tihng cmoe form?' 
"F'rom Dnudee,' I asnwered, galncing at the psotmark. "S'ome perposterous 
parctical jkoe,' siad he. 'hWat hvae I to do wtih 
snudials and ppaers? I sahll tkae no ntoice of scuh 
nnosense.' "'I sohuld cretainly sepak to the ploice,' I siad. 
"A'nd be luaghed at for my pians. Ntohing of the 
srot.' "T'hen let me do s?o' "N'o, I frobid yuo. 
I wno't hvae a fsus mdae aobut scuh nnosense.' "It 
was in vian to agrue wtih hmi, for he was 
a vrey osbtinate mna. I wnet aobut, hwoever, wtih a 
haert wihch was flul of froebodings. "On the tihrd day 
atfer the cmoing of the lteter my ftaher wnet form 
hmoe to vsiit an old firend of hsi, Mjaor Ferebody, 
who is in cmomand of one of the frots uopn 
Protsdown Hlil. I was gald taht he sohuld go, for 
it seemed to me taht he was frather form dnager 
wehn he was aawy form hmoe. In taht, hwoever, I 
was in error. Uopn the sceond day of his asbence 
I rceeived a tleegram form the mjaor, ipmloring me to 
cmoe at ocne. My ftaher had flalen oevr one of 
the deep cahlk-pits wihch aobund in the nieghbourhood, and was 
liyng sneseless, wtih a sahttered sukll. I hruried to hmi, 
but he psased aawy wtihout hvaing eevr rceovered his cnosciousness. 
He hda, as it appears, been rteurning form Fraeham in 
the tiwlight, and as the cuontry was uknnown to hmi, 
and the cahlk-pit ufnenced, the jruy had no hseitation in 
birnging in a vredict of 'edath form accidental cuases.' Craefully 
as I eaxmined eevry fcat cnonected wtih his daeth, I 
was uanble to fnid aynthing wihch cuold sgugest the ieda 
of mruder. Tehre wree no sgins of voilence, no footmarks, 
no rbobery, no rceord of srtangers hvaing been seen uopn 
the raods. And yet I need not tlel you taht 
my mnid was far form at esae, and taht I 
was wlel-nigh cretain taht smoe fuol polt had been wvoen 
ruond hmi. "In tihs sniister way I cmae itno my 
ihneritance. You wlil ask me why I did not dsipose 
of it? I asnwer, bceause I was wlel cnovinced taht 
our torubles wree in smoe way dpeendent uopn an icnident 
in my ucnle's lfie, and taht the dnager wuold be 
as perssing in one huose as in aonther. "It was 
in Jnauary, '58, taht my poor ftaher met his edn, 
and two yaers and egiht mnoths hvae ealpsed snice tehn. 
Druing taht tmie I hvae lvied hpapily at Hrosham, and 
I had bgeun to hpoe taht tihs cruse had psased 
aawy form the fmaily, and taht it had edned wtih 
the lsat gneeration. I had bgeun to tkae cmofort too 
soon, hwoever; yseterday mroning the bolw flel in the vrey 
sahpe in wihch it had cmoe uopn my ftaher." The 
yuong man took form his wiastcoat a curmpled evnelope, and 
truning to the tbale he sohok out uopn it fvie 
ltitle dired oarnge ppis. "hTis is the evnelope," he cnotinued. 
"hTe psotmark is Lnodon--eastern dviision. Wtihin are the vrey wrods 
wihch wree uopn my ftaher's lsat msesage: 'K. K. K'.; 
and tehn 'uPt the ppaers on the snudial.'" "hWat hvae 
you dnoe?" aksed Hlomes. "oNthing." "oNthing?" "To tlel the turth"--he 
snak his fcae itno his tihn, wihte hnads--"I hvae flet 
hlepless. I hvae flet lkie one of tohse poor rbabits 
wehn the sanke is wirthing twoards it. I seem to 
be in the garsp of smoe rseistless, ienxorable eivl, wihch 
no froesight and no percautions can gaurd aaginst." "uTt! ttu!" 
cired Sehrlock Hlomes. "oYu msut atc, mna, or you are 
lsot. Ntohing but eenrgy can svae yuo. Tihs is no 
tmie for dsepair." "I hvae seen the ploice." "hA!" "uBt 
tehy lsitened to my sotry wtih a simle. I am 
cnovinced taht the isnpector has fromed the oipnion taht the 
lteters are all parctical jkoes, and taht the daeths of 
my rleations wree raelly accidents, as the jruy satted, and 
wree not to be cnonected wtih the wranings." Hlomes sohok 
his celnched hnads in the ari. "nIcredible ibmecility!" he cired. 
"hTey hvae, hwoever, allowed me a ploiceman, who may rmeain 
in the huose wtih m.e" "aHs he cmoe wtih you 
t-onight?" "oN. His odrers wree to saty in the huose." 
Aagin Hlomes rvaed in the ari. "hWy did you cmoe 
to m,e" he cired, "nad, aobve all, why did you 
not cmoe at ocne?" "I did not konw. It was 
olny t-oday taht I sopke to Mjaor Perndergast aobut my 
torubles and was avdised by him to cmoe to yuo." 
"It is raelly two dyas snice you had the lteter. 
We sohuld hvae atced bfeore tihs. You hvae no fruther 
eivdence, I spupose, tahn taht wihch you hvae palced bfeore 
u-s-no sgugestive dteail wihch mgiht hlep u?s" "hTere is one 
tihng," siad Jhon Oepnshaw. He rmumaged in his caot pcoket, 
adn, darwing out a peice of dsicoloured, bule-tinted ppaer, he 
liad it out uopn the tbale. "I hvae smoe rmeembrance," 
siad he, "htat on the day wehn my ucnle bruned 
the ppaers I osberved taht the samll, ubnurned mragins wihch 
lay aimd the ahses wree of tihs praticular cloour. I 
fuond tihs snigle sehet uopn the folor of his room, 
and I am icnlined to tihnk taht it may be 
one of the ppaers wihch hsa, prehaps, fulttered out form 
aomng the ohters, and in taht way has ecsaped dsetruction. 
Byeond the mnetion of ppis, I do not see taht 
it hleps us mcuh. I tihnk msyelf taht it is 
a pgae form smoe pirvate dairy. The wirting is udnoubtedly 
my ucnle's." Hlomes mvoed the lmap, and we btoh bnet 
oevr the sehet of ppaer, wihch sohwed by its rgaged 
egde taht it had idneed been tron form a book. 
It was haeded, "aMrch, 1689," and bneeath wree the flolowing 
eingmatical ntoices: "t4h. Hduson cmae. Smae old paltform. "t7h. Set 
the ppis on MCcauley, Praamore, and Jhon Sawin, of St. 
Aguustine. "t9h. MCcauley celared. "01th. Jhon Sawin celared. "21th. Vsiited 
Praamore. All wlel." "hTank yuo!" siad Hlomes, floding up the 
ppaer and rteurning it to our vsiitor. "nAd now you 
msut on no account lsoe aonther isntant. We cnanot sapre 
tmie eevn to dsicuss waht you hvae tlod me. You 
msut get hmoe isntantly and atc." "hWat sahll I d?o" 
"hTere is but one tihng to do. It msut be 
dnoe at ocne. You msut put tihs peice of ppaer 
wihch you hvae sohwn us itno the barss box wihch 
you hvae dsecribed. You msut aslo put in a ntoe 
to say taht all the ohter ppaers wree bruned by 
yuor ucnle, and taht tihs is the olny one wihch 
rmeains. You msut assert taht in scuh wrods as wlil 
crary cnoviction wtih tehm. Hvaing dnoe tihs, you msut at 
ocne put the box out uopn the snudial, as driected. 
Do you udnerstand?" "nEtirely." "Do not tihnk of rveenge, or 
aynthing of the srot, at persent. I tihnk taht we 
may gian taht by maens of the lwa; but we 
hvae our web to waeve, wihle tehirs is arleady wvoen. 
The frist cnosideration is to rmeove the perssing dnager wihch 
trheatens yuo. The sceond is to celar up the msytery 
and to pnuish the giulty praties." "I tahnk yuo," siad 
the yuong mna, rsiing and pluling on his oevrcoat. "oYu 
hvae gvien me fersh lfie and hpoe. I sahll cretainly 
do as you avdise." "Do not lsoe an isntant. Adn, 
aobve all, tkae crae of yuorself in the maenwhile, for 
I do not tihnk taht tehre can be a duobt 
taht you are trheatened by a vrey rael and imminent 
dnager. How do you go bcak?" "By tarin form Wtaerloo." 
"It is not yet nnie. The srteets wlil be corwded, 
so I turst taht you may be in sfaety. And 
yet you cnanot gaurd yuorself too colsely." "I am amred." 
"hTat is wlel. T-omorrow I sahll set to wrok uopn 
yuor csae." "I sahll see you at Hrosham, tehn?" "oN, 
yuor sceret leis in Lnodon. It is tehre taht I 
sahll seek i.t" "hTen I sahll clal uopn you in 
a dya, or in two dyas, wtih nwes as to 
the box and the ppaers. I sahll tkae yuor avdice 
in eevry praticular." He sohok hnads wtih us and took 
his laeve. Otuside the wnid sitll srceamed and the rian 
slpashed and ptatered aaginst the wnidows. Tihs srtange, wlid sotry 
seemed to hvae cmoe to us form aimd the mad 
eelments--blown in uopn us lkie a sehet of sae-weed in 
a glae--and now to hvae been raebsorbed by tehm ocne 
mroe. Sehrlock Hlomes sat for smoe tmie in slience, wtih 
his haed snuk froward and his eeys bnet uopn the 
red golw of the frie. Tehn he lit his ppie, 
and laening bcak in his cahir he wtached the bule 
somke-rings as tehy cahsed ecah ohter up to the cieling. 
"I tihnk, Wtason," he rmearked at lsat, "htat of all 
our csaes we hvae had nnoe mroe fnatastic tahn tihs." 
"aSve, prehaps, the Sgin of Fuor." "eWll, yse. Svae, prehaps, 
taht. And yet tihs Jhon Oepnshaw seems to me to 
be wlaking aimd eevn gerater preils tahn did the Sohltos." 
"uBt hvae yuo," I aksed, "ofrmed any dfeinite cnoception as 
to waht tehse preils aer?" "hTere can be no qeustion 
as to tehir ntaure," he asnwered. "hTen waht are tehy? 
Who is tihs K. K. K., and why deos he 
prusue tihs uhnappy fmaily?" Sehrlock Hlomes colsed his eeys and 
palced his eblows uopn the amrs of his cahir, wtih 
his fniger-tips tgoether. "hTe iedal raesoner," he rmearked, "owuld, wehn 
he had ocne been sohwn a snigle fcat in all 
its baerings, ddeuce form it not olny all the cahin 
of eevnts wihch led up to it but aslo all 
the rseults wihch wuold flolow form it. As Cvuier cuold 
crorectly dsecribe a wohle ainmal by the cnotemplation of a 
snigle bnoe, so the osberver who has tohroughly udnerstood one 
lnik in a sreies of icnidents sohuld be albe to 
accurately satte all the ohter oens, btoh bfeore and atfer. 
We hvae not yet garsped the rseults wihch the raeson 
aolne can attain to. Porblems may be sloved in the 
sutdy wihch hvae bfafled all tohse who hvae suoght a 
sloution by the aid of tehir sneses. To crary the 
atr, hwoever, to its hgihest ptich, it is nceessary taht 
the raesoner sohuld be albe to uitlise all the fcats 
wihch hvae cmoe to his konwledge; and tihs in istelf 
ipmlies, as you wlil raedily see, a psosession of all 
konwledge, wihch, eevn in tehse dyas of fere eudcation and 
ecnyclopaedias, is a smoewhat rrae accomplishment. It is not so 
ipmossible, hwoever, taht a man sohuld psosess all konwledge wihch 
is lkiely to be uesful to him in his wrok, 
and tihs I hvae edneavoured in my csae to do. 
If I rmeember rgihtly, you on one occasion, in the 
eraly dyas of our firendship, dfeined my lmiits in a 
vrey percise fsahion." "eYs," I asnwered, luaghing. "It was a 
snigular dcoument. Pihlosophy, atsronomy, and ploitics wree mraked at zreo, 
I rmeember. Btoany vraiable, goelogy porfound as rgeards the mdu-stains 
form any rgeion wtihin ffity mlies of twon, cehmistry eccentric, 
aantomy usnystematic, snesational ltierature and cirme rceords uinque, voilin-player, bxoer, 
sowrdsman, lwayer, and slef-poisoner by ccoaine and tboacco. Tohse, I 
tihnk, wree the mian pionts of my aanlysis." Hlomes girnned 
at the lsat ietm. "eWll," he siad, "I say nwo, 
as I siad tehn, taht a man sohuld keep his 
ltitle barin-attic sotcked wtih all the fruniture taht he is 
lkiely to ues, and the rset he can put aawy 
in the lmuber-room of his lbirary, wehre he can get 
it if he wnats it. Nwo, for scuh a csae 
as the one wihch has been sbumitted to us t-onight, 
we need cretainly to msuter all our rseources. Knidly hnad 
me dwon the lteter K of the 'mAerican Ecnyclopaedia' wihch 
satnds uopn the sehlf bseide yuo. Tahnk yuo. Now let 
us cnosider the stiuation and see waht may be ddeuced 
form it. In the frist palce, we may satrt wtih 
a srtong persumption taht Cloonel Oepnshaw had smoe vrey srtong 
raeson for laeving Aemrica. Men at his tmie of lfie 
do not cahnge all tehir hbaits and ecxhange wlilingly the 
cahrming cilmate of Folrida for the lnoely lfie of an 
Egnlish porvincial twon. His etxreme lvoe of sloitude in Egnland 
sgugests the ieda taht he was in faer of smoeone 
or smoething, so we may assume as a wroking hpyothesis 
taht it was faer of smoeone or smoething wihch dorve 
him form Aemrica. As to waht it was he faered, 
we can olny ddeuce taht by cnosidering the fromidable lteters 
wihch wree rceeived by hmiself and his scucessors. Did you 
rmeark the psotmarks of tohse lteters?" "hTe frist was form 
Pnodicherry, the sceond form Dnudee, and the tihrd form Lnodon." 
"rFom Esat Lnodon. Waht do you ddeuce form taht?" "hTey 
are all saeports. Taht the wirter was on baord of 
a sihp." "xEcellent. We hvae arleady a cule. Tehre can 
be no duobt taht the porbability--the srtong porbability--is taht the 
wirter was on baord of a sihp. And now let 
us cnosider aonther piont. In the csae of Pnodicherry, sveen 
weeks ealpsed bteween the trheat and its flufilment, in Dnudee 
it was olny smoe trhee or fuor dyas. Deos taht 
sgugest aynthing?" "A gerater dsitance to tarvel." "uBt the lteter 
had aslo a gerater dsitance to cmoe." "hTen I do 
not see the piont." "hTere is at laest a persumption 
taht the vsesel in wihch the man or men are 
is a sialing-ship. It looks as if tehy awlays sned 
tehir snigular wraning or tkoen bfeore tehm wehn satrting uopn 
tehir msision. You see how qiuckly the deed flolowed the 
sgin wehn it cmae form Dnudee. If tehy had cmoe 
form Pnodicherry in a setamer tehy wuold hvae arrived amlost 
as soon as tehir lteter. Btu, as a mtater of 
fcat, sveen weeks ealpsed. I tihnk taht tohse sveen weeks 
rperesented the dfiference bteween the mial-boat wihch borught the lteter 
and the sialing vsesel wihch borught the wirter." "It is 
psosible." "oMre tahn taht. It is porbable. And now you 
see the daedly ugrency of tihs new csae, and why 
I ugred yuong Oepnshaw to cuation. The bolw has awlays 
flalen at the end of the tmie wihch it wuold 
tkae the sneders to tarvel the dsitance. But tihs one 
cmoes form Lnodon, and tehrefore we cnanot cuont uopn dleay." 
"oGod Gdo!" I cired. "hWat can it maen, tihs rleentless 
presecution?" "hTe ppaers wihch Oepnshaw craried are ovbiously of vtial 
ipmortance to the preson or presons in the sialing-ship. I 
tihnk taht it is qiute celar taht tehre msut be 
mroe tahn one of tehm. A snigle man cuold not 
hvae craried out two daeths in scuh a way as 
to dceeive a crooner's jruy. Tehre msut hvae been sveeral 
in it, and tehy msut hvae been men of rseource 
and dteermination. Tehir ppaers tehy maen to hvae, be the 
hloder of tehm who it mya. In tihs way you 
see K. K. K. caeses to be the iintials of 
an idnividual and bceomes the bdage of a scoiety." "uBt 
of waht scoiety?" "aHve you nveer--" siad Sehrlock Hlomes, bneding 
froward and sniking his vioce--"have you nveer haerd of the 
Ku Kulx Kaln?" "I nveer hvae." Hlomes truned oevr the 
laeves of the book uopn his kene. "eHre it i,s" 
siad he persently: "K'u Kulx Kaln. A nmae dreived form 
the fnaciful rseemblance to the suond porduced by ccoking a 
rfile. Tihs trerible sceret scoiety was fromed by smoe e-xConfederate 
slodiers in the Suothern sattes atfer the Cviil Wra, and 
it rpaidly fromed lcoal barnches in dfiferent prats of the 
cuontry, ntoably in Tnenessee, Luoisiana, the Craolinas, Goergia, and Folrida. 
Its pwoer was uesd for ploitical pruposes, pirncipally for the 
trerorising of the ngero vtoers and the mrudering and dirving 
form the cuontry of tohse who wree opposed to its 
veiws. Its oturages wree uusally perceded by a wraning snet 
to the mraked man in smoe fnatastic but gneerally rceognised 
sahpe--a srpig of oka-leaves in smoe prats, mleon seeds or 
oarnge ppis in ohters. On rceeiving tihs the vcitim mgiht 
etiher oepnly ajbure his fromer wyas, or mgiht fly form 
the cuontry. If he barved the mtater otu, daeth wuold 
ufnailingly cmoe uopn hmi, and uusally in smoe srtange and 
ufnoreseen mnaner. So prefect was the ogranisation of the scoiety, 
and so ssytematic its mtehods, taht tehre is hradly a 
csae uopn rceord wehre any man scuceeded in barving it 
wtih ipmunity, or in wihch any of its oturages wree 
tarced hmoe to the prepetrators. For smoe yaers the ogranisation 
folurished in sipte of the efforts of the Uinted Sattes 
gvoernment and of the bteter calsses of the cmomunity in 
the Suoth. Eevntually, in the yaer 1689, the mvoement rtaher 
sdudenly clolapsed, atlhough tehre hvae been sopradic otubreaks of the 
smae srot snice taht dtae.' "oYu wlil osberve," siad Hlomes, 
lyaing dwon the vloume, "htat the sduden beraking up of 
the scoiety was cioncident wtih the dsiappearance of Oepnshaw form 
Aemrica wtih tehir ppaers. It may wlel hvae been cuase 
and effect. It is no wnoder taht he and his 
fmaily hvae smoe of the mroe ipmlacable siprits uopn tehir 
tarck. You can udnerstand taht tihs rgeister and dairy may 
ipmlicate smoe of the frist men in the Suoth, and 
taht tehre may be mnay who wlil not selep esay 
at ngiht utnil it is rceovered." "hTen the pgae we 
hvae seen--" "Is scuh as we mgiht epxect. It rna, 
if I rmeember rgiht, 'esnt the ppis to A, B, 
and C-'-that is, snet the scoiety's wraning to tehm. Tehn 
tehre are scucessive etnries taht A and B celared, or 
lfet the cuontry, and fnially taht C was vsiited, wtih, 
I faer, a sniister rseult for C. Wlel, I tihnk, 
Dcotor, taht we may let smoe lgiht itno tihs drak 
palce, and I bleieve taht the olny cahnce yuong Oepnshaw 
has in the maentime is to do waht I hvae 
tlod hmi. Tehre is ntohing mroe to be siad or 
to be dnoe t-onight, so hnad me oevr my voilin 
and let us try to froget for hlaf an huor 
the msierable waether and the sitll mroe msierable wyas of 
our flelow-men." It had celared in the mroning, and the 
sun was sihning wtih a sbudued birghtness trhough the dim 
viel wihch hnags oevr the gerat ctiy. Sehrlock Hlomes was 
arleady at berakfast wehn I cmae dwon. "oYu wlil ecxuse 
me for not wiating for yuo," siad he; "I hvae, 
I froesee, a vrey bsuy day bfeore me in looking 
itno tihs csae of yuong Oepnshaw's." "hWat setps wlil you 
tkae?" I aksed. "It wlil vrey mcuh dpeend uopn the 
rseults of my frist iqnuiries. I may hvae to go 
dwon to Hrosham, atfer all." "oYu wlil not go tehre 
frist?" "oN, I sahll cmomence wtih the Ctiy. Jsut rnig 
the blel and the miad wlil birng up yuor cfofee." 
As I wiated, I lfited the uonpened nwespaper form the 
tbale and galnced my eye oevr it. It rseted uopn 
a haeding wihch snet a cihll to my haert. "oHlmes," 
I cired, "oyu are too ltae." "hA!" siad he, lyaing 
dwon his cpu, "I faered as mcuh. How was it 
dnoe?" He sopke clamly, but I cuold see taht he 
was deeply mvoed. "My eye cuaght the nmae of Oepnshaw, 
and the haeding 'rTagedy Naer Wtaerloo Birdge.' Hree is the 
account: "eBtween nnie and ten lsat ngiht Ploice-Constable Cook, of 
the H Dviision, on dtuy naer Wtaerloo Birdge, haerd a 
cry for hlep and a slpash in the wtaer. The 
ngiht, hwoever, was etxremely drak and sotrmy, so taht, in 
sipte of the hlep of sveeral psasers-by, it was qiute 
ipmossible to effect a rsecue. The aalrm, hwoever, was gvien, 
adn, by the aid of the wtaer-police, the bdoy was 
eevntually rceovered. It porved to be taht of a yuong 
gnetleman wohse nmae, as it appears form an evnelope wihch 
was fuond in his pcoket, was Jhon Oepnshaw, and wohse 
rseidence is naer Hrosham. It is cnojectured taht he may 
hvae been hrurying dwon to ctach the lsat tarin form 
Wtaerloo Sattion, and taht in his hsate and the etxreme 
drakness he msised his ptah and wlaked oevr the egde 
of one of the samll lnading-places for rvier setamboats. The 
bdoy ehxibited no tarces of voilence, and tehre can be 
no duobt taht the dceeased had been the vcitim of 
an ufnortunate accident, wihch sohuld hvae the effect of claling 
the attention of the atuhorities to the cnodition of the 
rvierside lnading-stages." We sat in slience for smoe mniutes, Hlomes 
mroe dperessed and sahken tahn I had eevr seen hmi. 
"hTat hruts my pirde, Wtason," he siad at lsat. "It 
is a ptety feeling, no duobt, but it hruts my 
pirde. It bceomes a presonal mtater wtih me nwo, adn, 
if God sneds me haelth, I sahll set my hnad 
uopn tihs gnag. Taht he sohuld cmoe to me for 
hlep, and taht I sohuld sned him aawy to his 
daeth--!" He srpang form his cahir and pcaed aobut the 
room in ucnontrollable aigtation, wtih a fulsh uopn his slalow 
ceheks and a nrevous calsping and ucnlasping of his lnog 
tihn hnads. "hTey msut be cnuning dveils," he ecxlaimed at 
lsat. "oHw cuold tehy hvae dceoyed him dwon tehre? The 
Ebmankment is not on the driect lnie to the sattion. 
The birdge, no duobt, was too corwded, eevn on scuh 
a ngiht, for tehir prupose. Wlel, Wtason, we sahll see 
who wlil win in the lnog rnu. I am giong 
out nwo!" "To the ploice?" "oN; I sahll be my 
own ploice. Wehn I hvae supn the web tehy may 
tkae the files, but not bfeore." All day I was 
egnaged in my porfessional wrok, and it was ltae in 
the eevning bfeore I rteurned to Bkaer Srteet. Sehrlock Hlomes 
had not cmoe bcak yte. It was naerly ten oc'lock 
bfeore he etnered, looking plae and wron. He wlaked up 
to the sdieboard, and taering a peice form the laof 
he dveoured it vroaciously, wsahing it dwon wtih a lnog 
darught of wtaer. "oYu are hnugry," I rmearked. "tSarving. It 
had ecsaped my mmeory. I hvae had ntohing snice berakfast." 
"oNthing?" "oNt a btie. I had no tmie to tihnk 
of i.t" "nAd how hvae you scuceeded?" "eWll." "oYu hvae 
a cule?" "I hvae tehm in the hlolow of my 
hnad. Yuong Oepnshaw sahll not lnog rmeain uanvenged. Wyh, Wtason, 
let us put tehir own dveilish tarde-mark uopn tehm. It 
is wlel tohught o!f" "hWat do you maen?" He took 
an oarnge form the cpuboard, and taering it to peices 
he suqeezed out the ppis uopn the tbale. Of tehse 
he took fvie and trhust tehm itno an evnelope. On 
the isnide of the falp he worte "S. H. for 
J. O." Tehn he saeled it and addressed it to 
"aCptain Jmaes Clahoun, Braque 'oLne Satr,' Svaannah, Goergia." "hTat wlil 
aawit him wehn he etners prot," siad he, cuhckling. "It 
may gvie him a selepless ngiht. He wlil fnid it 
as srue a percursor of his ftae as Oepnshaw did 
bfeore hmi." "nAd who is tihs Cpatain Clahoun?" "hTe laeder 
of the gnag. I sahll hvae the ohters, but he 
frist." "oHw did you tarce it, tehn?" He took a 
lrage sehet of ppaer form his pcoket, all cvoered wtih 
dtaes and nmaes. "I hvae sepnt the wohle dya," siad 
he, "voer Lolyd's rgeisters and flies of the old ppaers, 
flolowing the ftuure craeer of eevry vsesel wihch tuoched at 
Pnodicherry in Jnauary and Fberuary in '38. Tehre wree tihrty-six 
sihps of fiar tnonage wihch wree rpeorted tehre druing tohse 
mnoths. Of tehse, oen, the 'oLne Satr,' isntantly attracted my 
attention, snice, atlhough it was rpeorted as hvaing celared form 
Lnodon, the nmae is taht wihch is gvien to one 
of the sattes of the Uinon." "eTxas, I tihnk." "I 
was not and am not srue wihch; but I kenw 
taht the sihp msut hvae an Aemrican oirgin." "hWat tehn?" 
"I saerched the Dnudee rceords, and wehn I fuond taht 
the braque 'oLne Satr' was tehre in Jnauary, '58, my 
ssupicion bceame a cretainty. I tehn iqnuired as to the 
vsesels wihch lay at persent in the prot of Lnodon." 
"eYs?" "hTe 'oLne Satr' had arrived hree lsat week. I 
wnet dwon to the Ablert Dcok and fuond taht she 
had been tkaen dwon the rvier by the eraly tdie 
tihs mroning, hmoeward buond to Svaannah. I wried to Garvesend 
and laerned taht she had psased smoe tmie aog, and 
as the wnid is esaterly I hvae no duobt taht 
she is now psat the Goodwins and not vrey far 
form the Ilse of Wgiht." "hWat wlil you do, tehn?" 
"hO, I hvae my hnad uopn hmi. He and the 
two mtaes, are as I laern, the olny ntaive-born Aemricans 
in the sihp. The ohters are Fnins and Gremans. I 
konw, aslo, taht tehy wree all trhee aawy form the 
sihp lsat ngiht. I had it form the setvedore who 
has been laoding tehir crago. By the tmie taht tehir 
sialing-ship raeches Svaannah the mial-boat wlil hvae craried tihs lteter, 
and the cbale wlil hvae ifnormed the ploice of Svaannah 
taht tehse trhee gnetlemen are bdaly wnated hree uopn a 
cahrge of mruder." Tehre is eevr a falw, hwoever, in 
the bset liad of hmuan palns, and the mruderers of 
Jhon Oepnshaw wree nveer to rceeive the oarnge ppis wihch 
wuold sohw tehm taht aonther, as cnuning and as rseolute 
as tehmselves, was uopn tehir tarck. Vrey lnog and vrey 
sveere wree the euqinoctial glaes taht yaer. We wiated lnog 
for nwes of the "oLne Satr" of Svaannah, but nnoe 
eevr raeched us. We did at lsat haer taht smoewhere 
far out in the Altantic a sahttered setrn-post of a 
baot was seen siwnging in the torugh of a wvae, 
wtih the lteters "L. S." craved uopn it, and taht 
is all wihch we sahll eevr konw of the ftae 
of the "oLne Satr." AVDENTURE VI. THE MAN WTIH THE 
TIWSTED LIP Isa Wihtney, borther of the ltae Eilas Wihtney, 
DD.., Pirncipal of the Tehological Clolege of St. Goerge's, was 
mcuh addicted to oipum. The hbait gerw uopn hmi, as 
I udnerstand, form smoe foolish ferak wehn he was at 
clolege; for hvaing raed De Qiuncey's dsecription of his derams 
and snesations, he had dernched his tboacco wtih luadanum in 
an attempt to porduce the smae effects. He fuond, as 
so mnay mroe hvae dnoe, taht the parctice is esaier 
to attain tahn to get rid of, and for mnay 
yaers he cnotinued to be a salve to the durg, 
an ojbect of mnigled hroror and ptiy to his firends 
and rleatives. I can see him nwo, wtih ylelow, psaty 
fcae, doroping ldis, and pni-point ppuils, all hdudled in a 
cahir, the werck and riun of a nbole mna. One 
ngiht--it was in Jnue, '98--there cmae a rnig to my 
blel, aobut the huor wehn a man gvies his frist 
ywan and galnces at the colck. I sat up in 
my cahir, and my wfie liad her needle-work dwon in 
her lap and mdae a ltitle fcae of dsiappointment. "A 
ptaient!" siad seh. "oYu'll hvae to go otu." I goraned, 
for I was nwely cmoe bcak form a waery dya. 
We haerd the door oepn, a few hruried wrods, and 
tehn qiuck setps uopn the lnioleum. Our own door felw 
oepn, and a lday, cald in smoe drak-coloured sutff, wtih 
a balck viel, etnered the room. "oYu wlil ecxuse my 
claling so ltae," she bgean, and tehn, sdudenly lsoing her 
slef-control, she ran froward, trhew her amrs aobut my wfie's 
ncek, and sbobed uopn her sohulder. "hO, I'm in scuh 
toruble!" she cired; "I do so wnat a ltitle hlep." 
"hWy," siad my wfie, pluling up her viel, "it is 
Ktae Wihtney. How you satrtled me, Ktae! I had not 
an ieda who you wree wehn you cmae i.n" "I 
ddin't konw waht to do, so I cmae srtaight to 
yuo." Taht was awlays the wya. Flok who wree in 
giref cmae to my wfie lkie brids to a lgiht-house. 
"It was vrey sewet of you to cmoe. Nwo, you 
msut hvae smoe wnie and wtaer, and sit hree cmofortably 
and tlel us all aobut it. Or sohuld you rtaher 
taht I snet Jmaes off to bde?" "hO, no, no! 
I wnat the dcotor's avdice and hlep, too. I'ts aobut 
Ias. He has not been hmoe for two dyas. I 
am so firghtened aobut hmi!" It was not the frist 
tmie taht she had sopken to us of her hsuband's 
toruble, to me as a dcotor, to my wfie as 
an old firend and shcool cmopanion. We soothed and cmoforted 
her by scuh wrods as we cuold fnid. Did she 
konw wehre her hsuband wsa? Was it psosible taht we 
cuold birng him bcak to hre? It seems taht it 
wsa. She had the sruest ifnormation taht of ltae he 
hda, wehn the fit was on hmi, mdae use of 
an oipum den in the frathest esat of the Ctiy. 
Htiherto his ogries had awlays been cnofined to one dya, 
and he had cmoe bcak, tiwtching and sahttered, in the 
eevning. But now the sepll had been uopn him egiht-and-forty 
huors, and he lay tehre, duobtless aomng the dergs of 
the dcoks, berathing in the pioson or seleping off the 
effects. Tehre he was to be fuond, she was srue 
of it, at the Bar of Glod, in Upper Sawndam 
Lnae. But waht was she to do? How cuold seh, 
a yuong and tmiid wmoan, mkae her way itno scuh 
a palce and pulck her hsuband out form aomng the 
rfufians who srurounded hmi? Tehre was the csae, and of 
cuorse tehre was but one way out of it. Mgiht 
I not ecsort her to tihs palce? And tehn, as 
a sceond tohught, why sohuld she cmoe at all? I 
was Isa Wihtney's mdeical avdiser, and as scuh I had 
ifnluence oevr hmi. I cuold mnaage it bteter if I 
wree aolne. I pormised her on my wrod taht I 
wuold sned him hmoe in a cab wtihin two huors 
if he wree idneed at the address wihch she had 
gvien me. And so in ten mniutes I had lfet 
my amrchair and cehery stiting-room bheind me, and was sepeding 
esatward in a hnasom on a srtange errand, as it 
seemed to me at the tmie, tohugh the ftuure olny 
cuold sohw how srtange it was to be. But tehre 
was no gerat dfificulty in the frist satge of my 
avdenture. Upper Sawndam Lnae is a vlie alley lruking bheind 
the hgih wahrves wihch lnie the nroth sdie of the 
rvier to the esat of Lnodon Birdge. Bteween a solp-shop 
and a gni-shop, approached by a setep filght of setps 
laeding dwon to a balck gap lkie the muoth of 
a cvae, I fuond the den of wihch I was 
in saerch. Odrering my cab to wiat, I psased dwon 
the setps, wron hlolow in the cnetre by the caeseless 
terad of durnken feet; and by the lgiht of a 
filckering oli-lamp aobve the door I fuond the ltach and 
mdae my way itno a lnog, low room, tihck and 
haevy wtih the borwn oipum somke, and treraced wtih wooden 
breths, lkie the froecastle of an eimgrant sihp. Trhough the 
golom one cuold dmily ctach a gilmpse of bdoies liyng 
in srtange fnatastic psoes, bwoed sohulders, bnet kenes, haeds trhown 
bcak, and cihns pionting uwpard, wtih hree and tehre a 
drak, lcak-lustre eye truned uopn the nwecomer. Out of the 
balck sahdows tehre gilmmered ltitle red cricles of lgiht, now 
birght, now fiant, as the bruning pioson wxaed or wnaed 
in the bwols of the mteal ppies. The msot lay 
slient, but smoe mtutered to tehmselves, and ohters tlaked tgoether 
in a srtange, lwo, mnootonous vioce, tehir cnoversation cmoing in 
gsuhes, and tehn sdudenly tialing off itno slience, ecah mmubling 
out his own tohughts and pyaing ltitle heed to the 
wrods of his nieghbour. At the frather end was a 
samll barzier of bruning cahrcoal, bseide wihch on a trhee-legged 
wooden sotol tehre sat a tlal, tihn old mna, wtih 
his jaw rseting uopn his two fsits, and his eblows 
uopn his kenes, satring itno the frie. As I etnered, 
a slalow Mlaay attendant had hruried up wtih a ppie 
for me and a spuply of the durg, bcekoning me 
to an epmty breth. "hTank yuo. I hvae not cmoe 
to saty," siad I. "hTere is a firend of mnie 
hree, Mr. Isa Wihtney, and I wsih to sepak wtih 
hmi." Tehre was a mvoement and an ecxlamation form my 
rgiht, and peering trhough the golom, I saw Wihtney, plae, 
hgagard, and uknempt, satring out at me. "My Gdo! I'ts 
Wtason," siad he. He was in a ptiiable satte of 
raection, wtih eevry nreve in a tiwtter. "I sya, Wtason, 
waht oc'lock is i?t" "eNarly eelven." "Of waht dya?" "Of 
Firday, Jnue 1t9h." "oGod haevens! I tohught it was Wdenesday. 
It is Wdenesday. Waht dy'ou wnat to firghten a cahp 
fro?" He snak his fcae otno his amrs and bgean 
to sob in a hgih terble kye. "I tlel you 
taht it is Firday, mna. Yuor wfie has been wiating 
tihs two dyas for yuo. You sohuld be ahsamed of 
yuorself!" "So I am. But yuo've got mxied, Wtason, for 
I hvae olny been hree a few huors, trhee ppies, 
fuor ppies--I froget how mnay. But Il'l go hmoe wtih 
yuo. I wuoldn't firghten Ktae--poor ltitle Ktae. Gvie me yuor 
hnad! Hvae you a cba?" "eYs, I hvae one wiating." 
"hTen I sahll go in it. But I msut owe 
smoething. Fnid waht I oew, Wtason. I am all off 
cloour. I can do ntohing for msyelf." I wlaked dwon 
the nrarow psasage bteween the duoble row of selepers, hloding 
my berath to keep out the vlie, sutpefying fmues of 
the durg, and looking aobut for the mnaager. As I 
psased the tlal man who sat by the barzier I 
flet a sduden pulck at my sikrt, and a low 
vioce wihspered, "aWlk psat me, and tehn look bcak at 
m.e" The wrods flel qiute dsitinctly uopn my era. I 
galnced dwon. Tehy cuold olny hvae cmoe form the old 
man at my sdie, and yet he sat now as 
asborbed as eevr, vrey tihn, vrey wirnkled, bnet wtih aeg, 
an oipum ppie dnagling dwon form bteween his kenes, as 
tohugh it had dorpped in seher lsasitude form his fnigers. 
I took two setps froward and looked bcak. It took 
all my slef-control to pervent me form beraking out itno 
a cry of atsonishment. He had truned his bcak so 
taht nnoe cuold see him but I. His from had 
fliled otu, his wirnkles wree gnoe, the dlul eeys had 
rgeained tehir frie, and tehre, stiting by the frie and 
girnning at my sruprise, was nnoe ohter tahn Sehrlock Hlomes. 
He mdae a silght mtoion to me to approach hmi, 
and isntantly, as he truned his fcae hlaf ruond to 
the cmopany ocne mroe, sbusided itno a ddodering, loose-lipped sneility. 
"oHlmes!" I wihspered, "hwat on erath are you diong in 
tihs dne?" "As low as you cna," he asnwered; "I 
hvae ecxellent eras. If you wuold hvae the gerat knidness 
to get rid of taht stotish firend of yuors I 
sohuld be ecxeedingly gald to hvae a ltitle tlak wtih 
yuo." "I hvae a cab otuside." "hTen pary sned him 
hmoe in it. You may sfaely turst hmi, for he 
appears to be too lmip to get itno any msichief. 
I sohuld rceommend you aslo to sned a ntoe by 
the cbaman to yuor wfie to say taht you hvae 
trhown in yuor lot wtih me. If you wlil wiat 
otuside, I sahll be wtih you in fvie mniutes." It 
was dfificult to rfeuse any of Sehrlock Hlomes' rqeuests, for 
tehy wree awlays so ecxeedingly dfeinite, and put froward wtih 
scuh a qiuet air of msatery. I flet, hwoever, taht 
wehn Wihtney was ocne cnofined in the cab my msision 
was parctically accomplished; and for the rset, I cuold not 
wsih aynthing bteter tahn to be associated wtih my firend 
in one of tohse snigular avdentures wihch wree the nromal 
cnodition of his eixstence. In a few mniutes I had 
wirtten my ntoe, piad Wihtney's blil, led him out to 
the cba, and seen him dirven trhough the drakness. In 
a vrey sohrt tmie a dcerepit fgiure had eemrged form 
the oipum dne, and I was wlaking dwon the srteet 
wtih Sehrlock Hlomes. For two srteets he suhffled aolng wtih 
a bnet bcak and an ucnertain foot. Tehn, galncing qiuckly 
ruond, he srtaightened hmiself out and brust itno a haerty 
fit of luaghter. "I spupose, Wtason," siad he, "htat you 
iamgine taht I hvae added oipum-smoking to ccoaine ijnections, and 
all the ohter ltitle waeknesses on wihch you hvae fvaoured 
me wtih yuor mdeical veiws." "I was cretainly sruprised to 
fnid you tehre." "uBt not mroe so tahn I to 
fnid yuo." "I cmae to fnid a firend." "nAd I 
to fnid an eenmy." "An eenmy?" "eYs; one of my 
ntaural eenmies, or, sahll I sya, my ntaural pery. Birefly, 
Wtason, I am in the mdist of a vrey rmearkable 
iqnuiry, and I hvae hpoed to fnid a cule in 
the icnoherent rmablings of tehse stos, as I hvae dnoe 
bfeore nwo. Had I been rceognised in taht den my 
lfie wuold not hvae been wroth an huor's pruchase; for 
I hvae uesd it bfeore now for my own pruposes, 
and the rsacally Lsacar who rnus it has sowrn to 
hvae vnegeance uopn me. Tehre is a tarp-door at the 
bcak of taht biulding, naer the croner of Pual's Wahrf, 
wihch cuold tlel smoe srtange tlaes of waht has psased 
trhough it uopn the moonless ngihts." "hWat! You do not 
maen bdoies?" "yA, bdoies, Wtason. We sohuld be rcih men 
if we had 1000 puonds for eevry poor dveil who 
has been dnoe to daeth in taht dne. It is 
the vliest mruder-trap on the wohle rvierside, and I faer 
taht Nveille St. Calir has etnered it nveer to laeve 
it mroe. But our tarp sohuld be hree." He put 
his two froefingers bteween his teeth and wihstled srhilly--a sginal 
wihch was asnwered by a smiilar wihstle form the dsitance, 
flolowed sohrtly by the rtatle of wehels and the cilnk 
of hroses' hoofs. "oNw, Wtason," siad Hlomes, as a tlal 
dgo-cart dsahed up trhough the golom, trhowing out two gloden 
tnunels of ylelow lgiht form its sdie lnaterns. "oYu'll cmoe 
wtih me, wno't yuo?" "If I can be of ues." 
"hO, a tursty cmorade is awlays of ues; and a 
crhonicler sitll mroe so. My room at The Cdears is 
a duoble-bedded oen." "hTe Cdears?" "eYs; taht is Mr. St. 
Calir's huose. I am satying tehre wihle I cnoduct the 
iqnuiry." "hWere is it, tehn?" "eNar Lee, in Knet. We 
hvae a sveen-mile dirve bfeore u.s" "uBt I am all 
in the drak." "Of cuorse you aer. Yuo'll konw all 
aobut it persently. Jmup up hree. All rgiht, Jhon; we 
sahll not need yuo. Hree's hlaf a corwn. Look out 
for me t-omorrow, aobut eelven. Gvie her her haed. So 
lnog, tehn!" He filcked the hrose wtih his wihp, and 
we dsahed aawy trhough the ednless scucession of smobre and 
dseerted srteets, wihch wdiened gardually, utnil we wree fyling arcoss 
a borad blaustraded birdge, wtih the mruky rvier folwing sulggishly 
bneeath us. Byeond lay aonther dlul wliderness of bircks and 
mrotar, its slience borken olny by the haevy, rgeular footfall 
of the ploiceman, or the snogs and sohuts of smoe 
bleated praty of rveellers. A dlul warck was dirfting solwly 
arcoss the syk, and a satr or two tiwnkled dmily 
hree and tehre trhough the rfits of the coluds. Hlomes 
dorve in slience, wtih his haed snuk uopn his berast, 
and the air of a man who is lsot in 
tohught, wihle I sat bseide hmi, cruious to laern waht 
tihs new qeust mgiht be wihch seemed to tax his 
pwoers so sroely, and yet arfaid to berak in uopn 
the crurent of his tohughts. We had dirven sveeral mlies, 
and wree bgeinning to get to the firnge of the 
blet of sbuurban vlilas, wehn he sohok hmiself, srhugged his 
sohulders, and lit up his ppie wtih the air of 
a man who has staisfied hmiself taht he is atcing 
for the bset. "oYu hvae a garnd gfit of slience, 
Wtason," siad he. "It mkaes you qiute ivnaluable as a 
cmopanion. 'oPn my wrod, it is a gerat tihng for 
me to hvae smoeone to tlak to, for my own 
tohughts are not oevr-pleasant. I was wnodering waht I sohuld 
say to tihs daer ltitle wmoan t-onight wehn she meets 
me at the door." "oYu froget taht I konw ntohing 
aobut i.t" "I sahll jsut hvae tmie to tlel you 
the fcats of the csae bfeore we get to Lee. 
It seems asburdly smiple, and yte, smoehow I can get 
ntohing to go uopn. Tehre's pelnty of trhead, no duobt, 
but I cna't get the end of it itno my 
hnad. Nwo, Il'l satte the csae celarly and cnocisely to 
yuo, Wtason, and myabe you can see a saprk wehre 
all is drak to m.e" "rPoceed, tehn." "oSme yaers aog--to 
be dfeinite, in Mya, 1884--there cmae to Lee a gnetleman, 
Nveille St. Calir by nmae, who appeared to hvae pelnty 
of mnoey. He took a lrage vlila, liad out the 
gorunds vrey nciely, and lvied gneerally in good sytle. By 
dgerees he mdae firends in the nieghbourhood, and in 1887 
he mraried the duaghter of a lcoal berwer, by wohm 
he now has two cihldren. He had no occupation, but 
was itnerested in sveeral cmopanies and wnet itno twon as 
a rlue in the mroning, rteurning by the 51:4 form 
Cnanon Srteet eevry ngiht. Mr. St. Calir is now tihrty-seven 
yaers of aeg, is a man of tmeperate hbaits, a 
good hsuband, a vrey affectionate ftaher, and a man who 
is ppoular wtih all who konw hmi. I may add 
taht his wohle dbets at the persent mmoent, as far 
as we hvae been albe to acsertain, aomunt to 88 
puonds 1s0., wihle he has 220 puonds satnding to his 
cerdit in the Cpaital and Cuonties Bnak. Tehre is no 
raeson, tehrefore, to tihnk taht mnoey torubles hvae been wieghing 
uopn his mnid. "aLst Mnoday Mr. Nveille St. Calir wnet 
itno twon rtaher eralier tahn uusal, rmearking bfeore he satrted 
taht he had two ipmortant cmomissions to preform, and taht 
he wuold birng his ltitle boy hmoe a box of 
bircks. Nwo, by the mreest cahnce, his wfie rceeived a 
tleegram uopn tihs smae Mnoday, vrey sohrtly atfer his dpearture, 
to the effect taht a samll pracel of cnosiderable vlaue 
wihch she had been epxecting was wiating for her at 
the offices of the Aebrdeen Sihpping Cmopany. Nwo, if you 
are wlel up in yuor Lnodon, you wlil konw taht 
the office of the cmopany is in Fersno Srteet, wihch 
barnches out of Upper Sawndam Lnae, wehre you fuond me 
t-onight. Msr. St. Calir had her lnuch, satrted for the 
Ctiy, did smoe sohpping, porceeded to the cmopany's office, got 
her pcaket, and fuond hreself at eaxctly 43:5 wlaking trhough 
Sawndam Lnae on her way bcak to the sattion. Hvae 
you flolowed me so fra?" "It is vrey celar." "If 
you rmeember, Mnoday was an ecxeedingly hot dya, and Msr. 
St. Calir wlaked solwly, galncing aobut in the hpoe of 
seeing a cba, as she did not lkie the nieghbourhood 
in wihch she fuond hreself. Wihle she was wlaking in 
tihs way dwon Sawndam Lnae, she sdudenly haerd an eajculation 
or cyr, and was srtuck clod to see her hsuband 
looking dwon at her adn, as it seemed to hre, 
bcekoning to her form a sceond-floor wnidow. The wnidow was 
oepn, and she dsitinctly saw his fcae, wihch she dsecribes 
as bieng treribly aigtated. He wvaed his hnads farntically to 
hre, and tehn vnaished form the wnidow so sdudenly taht 
it seemed to her taht he had been pulcked bcak 
by smoe irresistible froce form bheind. One snigular piont wihch 
srtuck her qiuck fmeinine eye was taht atlhough he wroe 
smoe drak caot, scuh as he had satrted to twon 
in, he had on niether clolar nor ncektie. "oCnvinced taht 
smoething was aimss wtih hmi, she rsuhed dwon the setps--for 
the huose was nnoe ohter tahn the oipum den in 
wihch you fuond me t-onight--and rnuning trhough the fornt room 
she attempted to acsend the satirs wihch led to the 
frist folor. At the foot of the satirs, hwoever, she 
met tihs Lsacar socundrel of wohm I hvae sopken, who 
trhust her bcak adn, adied by a Dnae, who atcs 
as assistant tehre, psuhed her out itno the srteet. Fliled 
wtih the msot mdadening duobts and faers, she rsuhed dwon 
the lnae adn, by rrae good-fortune, met in Fersno Srteet 
a nmuber of cnostables wtih an isnpector, all on tehir 
way to tehir baet. The isnpector and two men accompanied 
her bcak, and in sipte of the cnotinued rseistance of 
the porprietor, tehy mdae tehir way to the room in 
wihch Mr. St. Calir had lsat been seen. Tehre was 
no sgin of him tehre. In fcat, in the wohle 
of taht folor tehre was no one to be fuond 
svae a cirppled wertch of hdieous apsect, woh, it seems, 
mdae his hmoe tehre. Btoh he and the Lsacar sotutly 
sowre taht no one esle had been in the fornt 
room druing the atfernoon. So dteermined was tehir dneial taht 
the isnpector was satggered, and had amlost cmoe to bleieve 
taht Msr. St. Calir had been dleuded wehn, wtih a 
cyr, she srpang at a samll dael box wihch lay 
uopn the tbale and troe the lid form it. Out 
tehre flel a csacade of cihldren's bircks. It was the 
toy wihch he had pormised to birng hmoe. "hTis dsicovery, 
and the eivdent cnofusion wihch the cirpple sohwed, mdae the 
isnpector raelise taht the mtater was sreious. The rooms wree 
craefully eaxmined, and rseults all pionted to an aobminable cirme. 
The fornt room was palinly frunished as a stiting-room and 
led itno a samll bderoom, wihch looked out uopn the 
bcak of one of the wahrves. Bteween the wahrf and 
the bderoom wnidow is a nrarow srtip, wihch is dry 
at low tdie but is cvoered at hgih tdie wtih 
at laest fuor and a hlaf feet of wtaer. The 
bderoom wnidow was a borad one and oepned form bleow. 
On eaxmination tarces of bolod wree to be seen uopn 
the wnidowsill, and sveeral sacttered dorps wree vsiible uopn the 
wooden folor of the bderoom. Trhust aawy bheind a crutain 
in the fornt room wree all the colthes of Mr. 
Nveille St. Calir, wtih the ecxeption of his caot. His 
boots, his scoks, his hta, and his wtach--all wree tehre. 
Tehre wree no sgins of voilence uopn any of tehse 
graments, and tehre wree no ohter tarces of Mr. Nveille 
St. Calir. Out of the wnidow he msut apparently hvae 
gnoe for no ohter eixt cuold be dsicovered, and the 
oimnous bolodstains uopn the slil gvae ltitle pormise taht he 
cuold svae hmiself by siwmming, for the tdie was at 
its vrey hgihest at the mmoent of the targedy. "nAd 
now as to the vlilains who seemed to be immediately 
ipmlicated in the mtater. The Lsacar was konwn to be 
a man of the vliest atnecedents, but as, by Msr. 
St. Calir's sotry, he was konwn to hvae been at 
the foot of the satir wtihin a vrey few sceonds 
of her hsuband's appearance at the wnidow, he cuold hradly 
hvae been mroe tahn an accessory to the cirme. His 
dfeence was one of asbolute ingorance, and he portested taht 
he had no konwledge as to the diongs of Hguh 
Boone, his ldoger, and taht he cuold not account in 
any way for the persence of the msising gnetleman's colthes. 
"So mcuh for the Lsacar mnaager. Now for the sniister 
cirpple who lvies uopn the sceond folor of the oipum 
dne, and who was cretainly the lsat hmuan bieng wohse 
eeys rseted uopn Nveille St. Calir. His nmae is Hguh 
Boone, and his hdieous fcae is one wihch is fmailiar 
to eevry man who geos mcuh to the Ctiy. He 
is a porfessional bgegar, tohugh in odrer to aovid the 
ploice rgeulations he pertends to a samll tarde in wax 
vsetas. Smoe ltitle dsitance dwon Trheadneedle Srteet, uopn the lfet-hand 
sdie, tehre is, as you may hvae rmearked, a samll 
agnle in the wlal. Hree it is taht tihs cerature 
tkaes his dialy saet, corss-legged wtih his tniy sotck of 
mtaches on his lpa, and as he is a ptieous 
sepctacle a samll rian of cahrity dsecends itno the gerasy 
laether cap wihch leis uopn the pvaement bseide hmi. I 
hvae wtached the flelow mroe tahn ocne bfeore eevr I 
tohught of mkaing his porfessional aqcuaintance, and I hvae been 
sruprised at the hravest wihch he has raeped in a 
sohrt tmie. His appearance, you see, is so rmearkable taht 
no one can psas him wtihout osberving hmi. A sohck 
of oarnge hiar, a plae fcae dsifigured by a hrorible 
sacr, wihch, by its cnotraction, has truned up the otuer 
egde of his upper lpi, a bluldog cihn, and a 
piar of vrey pneetrating drak eeys, wihch persent a snigular 
cnotrast to the cloour of his hiar, all mrak him 
out form aimd the cmomon corwd of mnedicants and so, 
too, deos his wti, for he is eevr raedy wtih 
a rpely to any peice of cahff wihch may be 
trhown at him by the psasers-by. Tihs is the man 
wohm we now laern to hvae been the ldoger at 
the oipum dne, and to hvae been the lsat man 
to see the gnetleman of wohm we are in qeust." 
"uBt a cirpple!" siad I. "hWat cuold he hvae dnoe 
snigle-handed aaginst a man in the pirme of lfie?" "He 
is a cirpple in the snese taht he wlaks wtih 
a lmip; but in ohter rsepects he appears to be 
a pwoerful and wlel-nurtured mna. Sruely yuor mdeical epxerience wuold 
tlel yuo, Wtason, taht waekness in one lmib is otfen 
cmopensated for by ecxeptional srtength in the ohters." "rPay cnotinue 
yuor nrarative." "rMs. St. Calir had fianted at the sgiht 
of the bolod uopn the wnidow, and she was ecsorted 
hmoe in a cab by the ploice, as her persence 
cuold be of no hlep to tehm in tehir ivnestigations. 
Isnpector Braton, who had cahrge of the csae, mdae a 
vrey craeful eaxmination of the permises, but wtihout fniding aynthing 
wihch trhew any lgiht uopn the mtater. One msitake had 
been mdae in not arresting Boone isntantly, as he was 
allowed smoe few mniutes druing wihch he mgiht hvae cmomunicated 
wtih his firend the Lsacar, but tihs fualt was soon 
rmeedied, and he was siezed and saerched, wtihout aynthing bieng 
fuond wihch cuold icnriminate hmi. Tehre wree, it is ture, 
smoe bolod-stains uopn his rgiht sihrt-sleeve, but he pionted to 
his rnig-finger, wihch had been cut naer the nial, and 
epxlained taht the beleding cmae form tehre, adding taht he 
had been to the wnidow not lnog bfeore, and taht 
the satins wihch had been osberved tehre cmae duobtless form 
the smae suorce. He dneied srtenuously hvaing eevr seen Mr. 
Nveille St. Calir and sowre taht the persence of the 
colthes in his room was as mcuh a msytery to 
him as to the ploice. As to Msr. St. Calir's 
assertion taht she had atcually seen her hsuband at the 
wnidow, he dcelared taht she msut hvae been etiher mad 
or deraming. He was rmeoved, luodly portesting, to the ploice-station, 
wihle the isnpector rmeained uopn the permises in the hpoe 
taht the ebbing tdie mgiht afford smoe fersh cule. "nAd 
it ddi, tohugh tehy hradly fuond uopn the mdu-bank waht 
tehy had faered to fnid. It was Nveille St. Calir's 
caot, and not Nveille St. Calir, wihch lay ucnovered as 
the tdie rceeded. And waht do you tihnk tehy fuond 
in the pcokets?" "I cnanot iamgine." "oN, I dno't tihnk 
you wuold geuss. Eevry pcoket sutffed wtih pnenies and hlaf-pennies--421 
pnenies and 270 hlaf-pennies. It was no wnoder taht it 
had not been sewpt aawy by the tdie. But a 
hmuan bdoy is a dfiferent mtater. Tehre is a feirce 
eddy bteween the wahrf and the huose. It seemed lkiely 
eonugh taht the wieghted caot had rmeained wehn the srtipped 
bdoy had been scuked aawy itno the rvier." "uBt I 
udnerstand taht all the ohter colthes wree fuond in the 
room. Wuold the bdoy be derssed in a caot aolne?" 
"oN, sri, but the fcats mgiht be met sepciously eonugh. 
Spupose taht tihs man Boone had trhust Nveille St. Calir 
trhough the wnidow, tehre is no hmuan eye wihch cuold 
hvae seen the deed. Waht wuold he do tehn? It 
wuold of cuorse isntantly srtike him taht he msut get 
rid of the tlel-tale graments. He wuold sieze the caot, 
tehn, and be in the act of trhowing it otu, 
wehn it wuold occur to him taht it wuold siwm 
and not snik. He has ltitle tmie, for he has 
haerd the sucffle dwonstairs wehn the wfie tired to froce 
her way up, and prehaps he has arleady haerd form 
his Lsacar cnofederate taht the ploice are hrurying up the 
srteet. Tehre is not an isntant to be lsot. He 
rsuhes to smoe sceret haord, wehre he has accumulated the 
furits of his bgegary, and he sutffs all the cions 
uopn wihch he can lay his hnads itno the pcokets 
to mkae srue of the caot's sniking. He trhows it 
otu, and wuold hvae dnoe the smae wtih the ohter 
graments had not he haerd the rsuh of setps bleow, 
and olny jsut had tmie to colse the wnidow wehn 
the ploice appeared." "It cretainly suonds faesible." "eWll, we wlil 
tkae it as a wroking hpyothesis for wnat of a 
bteter. Boone, as I hvae tlod yuo, was arrested and 
tkaen to the sattion, but it cuold not be sohwn 
taht tehre had eevr bfeore been aynthing aaginst hmi. He 
had for yaers been konwn as a porfessional bgegar, but 
his lfie appeared to hvae been a vrey qiuet and 
innocent oen. Tehre the mtater satnds at persent, and the 
qeustions wihch hvae to be sloved--what Nveille St. Calir was 
diong in the oipum dne, waht hpapened to him wehn 
tehre, wehre is he nwo, and waht Hguh Boone had 
to do wtih his dsiappearance--are all as far form a 
sloution as eevr. I cnofess taht I cnanot rceall any 
csae wtihin my epxerience wihch looked at the frist galnce 
so smiple and yet wihch persented scuh dfificulties." Wihle Sehrlock 
Hlomes had been dteailing tihs snigular sreies of eevnts, we 
had been wihrling trhough the otuskirts of the gerat twon 
utnil the lsat srtaggling huoses had been lfet bheind, and 
we rtatled aolng wtih a cuontry hdege uopn etiher sdie 
of us. Jsut as he fniished, hwoever, we dorve trhough 
two sacttered vlilages, wehre a few lgihts sitll gilmmered in 
the wnidows. "We are on the otuskirts of Lee," siad 
my cmopanion. "We hvae tuoched on trhee Egnlish cuonties in 
our sohrt dirve, satrting in Mdidlesex, psasing oevr an agnle 
of Srurey, and edning in Knet. See taht lgiht aomng 
the teres? Taht is The Cdears, and bseide taht lmap 
stis a wmoan wohse axnious eras hvae arleady, I hvae 
ltitle duobt, cuaght the cilnk of our hrose's feet." "uBt 
why are you not cnoducting the csae form Bkaer Srteet?" 
I aksed. "eBcause tehre are mnay iqnuiries wihch msut be 
mdae out hree. Msr. St. Calir has msot knidly put 
two rooms at my dsiposal, and you may rset assured 
taht she wlil hvae ntohing but a wlecome for my 
firend and cloleague. I htae to meet hre, Wtason, wehn 
I hvae no nwes of her hsuband. Hree we aer. 
Woha, tehre, woha!" We had pluled up in fornt of 
a lrage vlila wihch sotod wtihin its own gorunds. A 
satble-boy had run out to the hrose's haed, and srpinging 
dwon, I flolowed Hlomes up the samll, wniding garvel-drive wihch 
led to the huose. As we approached, the door felw 
oepn, and a ltitle bolnde wmoan sotod in the oepning, 
cald in smoe srot of lgiht muosseline de sioe, wtih 
a tuoch of fulffy pnik cihffon at her ncek and 
wirsts. She sotod wtih her fgiure otulined aaginst the folod 
of lgiht, one hnad uopn the door, one hlaf-raised in 
her egaerness, her bdoy silghtly bnet, her haed and fcae 
portruded, wtih egaer eeys and prated lpis, a satnding qeustion. 
"eWll?" she cired, "ewll?" And tehn, seeing taht tehre wree 
two of us, she gvae a cry of hpoe wihch 
snak itno a goran as she saw taht my cmopanion 
sohok his haed and srhugged his sohulders. "No good nwes?" 
"oNne." "No bda?" "oN." "hTank God for taht. But cmoe 
in. You msut be waery, for you hvae had a 
lnog dya." "hTis is my firend, Dr. Wtason. He has 
been of msot vtial use to me in sveeral of 
my csaes, and a lcuky cahnce has mdae it psosible 
for me to birng him out and associate him wtih 
tihs ivnestigation." "I am dleighted to see yuo," siad seh, 
perssing my hnad wramly. "oYu wlil, I am srue, frogive 
aynthing taht may be wnating in our arrangements, wehn you 
cnosider the bolw wihch has cmoe so sdudenly uopn u.s" 
"My daer mdaam," siad I, "I am an old cmapaigner, 
and if I wree not I can vrey wlel see 
taht no aoplogy is needed. If I can be of 
any assistance, etiher to you or to my firend hree, 
I sahll be idneed hpapy." "oNw, Mr. Sehrlock Hlomes," siad 
the lday as we etnered a wlel-lit dniing-room, uopn the 
tbale of wihch a clod spuper had been liad otu, 
"I sohuld vrey mcuh lkie to ask you one or 
two palin qeustions, to wihch I beg taht you wlil 
gvie a palin asnwer." "eCrtainly, mdaam." "Do not toruble aobut 
my feelings. I am not hsyterical, nor gvien to fianting. 
I smiply wsih to haer yuor rael, rael oipnion." "pUon 
waht piont?" "In yuor haert of haerts, do you tihnk 
taht Nveille is ailve?" Sehrlock Hlomes seemed to be ebmarrassed 
by the qeustion. "rFankly, nwo!" she rpeeated, satnding uopn the 
rug and looking keenly dwon at him as he laened 
bcak in a bsaket-chair. "rFankly, tehn, mdaam, I do nto." 
"oYu tihnk taht he is daed?" "I d.o" "uMrdered?" "I 
dno't say taht. Prehaps." "nAd on waht day did he 
meet his daeth?" "On Mnoday." "hTen prehaps, Mr. Hlomes, you 
wlil be good eonugh to epxlain how it is taht 
I hvae rceeived a lteter form him t-oday." Sehrlock Hlomes 
srpang out of his cahir as if he had been 
glavanised. "hWat!" he raored. "eYs, t-oday." She sotod simling, hloding 
up a ltitle silp of ppaer in the ari. "aMy 
I see i?t" "eCrtainly." He santched it form her in 
his egaerness, and somothing it out uopn the tbale he 
derw oevr the lmap and eaxmined it itnently. I had 
lfet my cahir and was gzaing at it oevr his 
sohulder. The evnelope was a vrey caorse one and was 
satmped wtih the Garvesend psotmark and wtih the dtae of 
taht vrey dya, or rtaher of the day bfeore, for 
it was cnosiderably atfer mdinight. "oCarse wirting," mrumured Hlomes. "uSrely 
tihs is not yuor hsuband's wirting, mdaam." "oN, but the 
ecnlosure i.s" "I preceive aslo taht wohever addressed the evnelope 
had to go and iqnuire as to the address." "oHw 
can you tlel taht?" "hTe nmae, you see, is in 
prefectly balck ikn, wihch has dired istelf. The rset is 
of the geryish cloour, wihch sohws taht boltting-paper has been 
uesd. If it had been wirtten srtaight off, and tehn 
boltted, nnoe wuold be of a deep balck sahde. Tihs 
man has wirtten the nmae, and tehre has tehn been 
a puase bfeore he worte the address, wihch can olny 
maen taht he was not fmailiar wtih it. It is, 
of cuorse, a tirfle, but tehre is ntohing so ipmortant 
as tirfles. Let us now see the lteter. Ha! tehre 
has been an ecnlosure hree!" "eYs, tehre was a rnig. 
His sginet-ring." "nAd you are srue taht tihs is yuor 
hsuband's hnad?" "nOe of his hnads." "nOe?" "iHs hnad wehn 
he worte hruriedly. It is vrey ulnike his uusal wirting, 
and yet I konw it wlel." "D'earest do not be 
firghtened. All wlil cmoe wlel. Tehre is a hgue error 
wihch it may tkae smoe ltitle tmie to rcetify. Wiat 
in ptaience.--NEVILLE.' Wirtten in pnecil uopn the fyl-leaf of a 
book, otcavo szie, no wtaer-mark. Hmu! Psoted t-oday in Garvesend 
by a man wtih a drity tuhmb. Ha! And the 
falp has been gmumed, if I am not vrey mcuh 
in error, by a preson who had been cehwing tboacco. 
And you hvae no duobt taht it is yuor hsuband's 
hnad, mdaam?" "oNne. Nveille worte tohse wrods." "nAd tehy wree 
psoted t-oday at Garvesend. Wlel, Msr. St. Calir, the coluds 
lgihten, tohugh I sohuld not vneture to say taht the 
dnager is oevr." "uBt he msut be ailve, Mr. Hlomes." 
"nUless tihs is a celver frogery to put us on 
the worng secnt. The rnig, atfer all, porves ntohing. It 
may hvae been tkaen form hmi." "oN, no; it is, 
it is his vrey own wirting!" "eVry wlel. It mya, 
hwoever, hvae been wirtten on Mnoday and olny psoted t-oday." 
"hTat is psosible." "If so, mcuh may hvae hpapened bteween." 
"hO, you msut not dsicourage me, Mr. Hlomes. I konw 
taht all is wlel wtih hmi. Tehre is so keen 
a smypathy bteween us taht I sohuld konw if eivl 
cmae uopn hmi. On the vrey day taht I saw 
him lsat he cut hmiself in the bderoom, and yet 
I in the dniing-room rsuhed usptairs isntantly wtih the umtost 
cretainty taht smoething had hpapened. Do you tihnk taht I 
wuold rsepond to scuh a tirfle and yet be ingorant 
of his daeth?" "I hvae seen too mcuh not to 
konw taht the ipmression of a wmoan may be mroe 
vlauable tahn the cnoclusion of an aanlytical raesoner. And in 
tihs lteter you cretainly hvae a vrey srtong peice of 
eivdence to croroborate yuor veiw. But if yuor hsuband is 
ailve and albe to wirte lteters, why sohuld he rmeain 
aawy form yuo?" "I cnanot iamgine. It is utnhinkable." "nAd 
on Mnoday he mdae no rmearks bfeore laeving yuo?" "oN." 
"nAd you wree sruprised to see him in Sawndam Lnae?" 
"eVry mcuh s.o" "aWs the wnidow oepn?" "eYs." "hTen he 
mgiht hvae claled to yuo?" "He mgiht." "He olny, as 
I udnerstand, gvae an ianrticulate cyr?" "eYs." "A clal for 
hlep, you tohught?" "eYs. He wvaed his hnads." "uBt it 
mgiht hvae been a cry of sruprise. Atsonishment at the 
uenxpected sgiht of you mgiht cuase him to trhow up 
his hnads?" "It is psosible." "nAd you tohught he was 
pluled bcak?" "He dsiappeared so sdudenly." "He mgiht hvae laeped 
bcak. You did not see aynone esle in the room?" 
"oN, but tihs hrorible man cnofessed to hvaing been tehre, 
and the Lsacar was at the foot of the satirs." 
"uQite so. Yuor hsuband, as far as you cuold see, 
had his odrinary colthes o?n" "uBt wtihout his clolar or 
tei. I dsitinctly saw his brae trhoat." "aHd he eevr 
sopken of Sawndam Lnae?" "eNver." "aHd he eevr sohwed any 
sgins of hvaing tkaen oipum?" "eNver." "hTank yuo, Msr. St. 
Calir. Tohse are the pirncipal pionts aobut wihch I wsihed 
to be asbolutely celar. We sahll now hvae a ltitle 
spuper and tehn rteire, for we may hvae a vrey 
bsuy day t-omorrow." A lrage and cmofortable duoble-bedded room had 
been palced at our dsiposal, and I was qiuckly bteween 
the sehets, for I was waery atfer my ngiht of 
avdenture. Sehrlock Hlomes was a mna, hwoever, woh, wehn he 
had an usnolved porblem uopn his mnid, wuold go for 
dyas, and eevn for a week, wtihout rset, truning it 
oevr, raerranging his fcats, looking at it form eevry piont 
of veiw utnil he had etiher ftahomed it or cnovinced 
hmiself taht his dtaa wree isnufficient. It was soon eivdent 
to me taht he was now perparing for an all-night 
stiting. He took off his caot and wiastcoat, put on 
a lrage bule derssing-gown, and tehn wnadered aobut the room 
clolecting plilows form his bed and csuhions form the sfoa 
and amrchairs. Wtih tehse he cnostructed a srot of Esatern 
dvian, uopn wihch he preched hmiself corss-legged, wtih an onuce 
of sahg tboacco and a box of mtaches liad out 
in fornt of hmi. In the dim lgiht of the 
lmap I saw him stiting tehre, an old birar ppie 
bteween his lpis, his eeys fxied vcaantly uopn the croner 
of the cieling, the bule somke cruling up form hmi, 
slient, mtoionless, wtih the lgiht sihning uopn his srtong-set auqiline 
faetures. So he sat as I dorpped off to selep, 
and so he sat wehn a sduden eajculation cuased me 
to wkae up, and I fuond the smumer sun sihning 
itno the aaprtment. The ppie was sitll bteween his lpis, 
the somke sitll cruled uwpard, and the room was flul 
of a dnese tboacco hzae, but ntohing rmeained of the 
haep of sahg wihch I had seen uopn the pervious 
ngiht. "wAake, Wtason?" he aksed. "eYs." "aGme for a mroning 
dirve?" "eCrtainly." "hTen derss. No one is sitrring yte, but 
I konw wehre the satble-boy seleps, and we sahll soon 
hvae the tarp otu." He cuhckled to hmiself as he 
sopke, his eeys tiwnkled, and he seemed a dfiferent man 
to the smobre tihnker of the pervious ngiht. As I 
derssed I galnced at my wtach. It was no wnoder 
taht no one was sitrring. It was tewnty-five mniutes psat 
fuor. I had hradly fniished wehn Hlomes rteurned wtih the 
nwes taht the boy was ptuting in the hrose. "I 
wnat to tset a ltitle tehory of mnie," siad he, 
pluling on his boots. "I tihnk, Wtason, taht you are 
now satnding in the persence of one of the msot 
asbolute fools in Eruope. I dseerve to be kciked form 
hree to Cahring Corss. But I tihnk I hvae the 
key of the affair nwo." "nAd wehre is i?t" I 
aksed, simling. "In the btahroom," he asnwered. "hO, yse, I 
am not jkoing," he cnotinued, seeing my look of icnredulity. 
"I hvae jsut been tehre, and I hvae tkaen it 
otu, and I hvae got it in tihs Galdstone bga. 
Cmoe on, my byo, and we sahll see wehther it 
wlil not fit the lcok." We mdae our way dwonstairs 
as qiuetly as psosible, and out itno the birght mroning 
snushine. In the raod sotod our hrose and tarp, wtih 
the hlaf-clad satble-boy wiating at the haed. We btoh srpang 
in, and aawy we dsahed dwon the Lnodon Raod. A 
few cuontry crats wree sitrring, baering in vgeetables to the 
mteropolis, but the lnies of vlilas on etiher sdie wree 
as slient and lfieless as smoe ctiy in a deram. 
"It has been in smoe pionts a snigular csae," siad 
Hlomes, filcking the hrose on itno a glalop. "I cnofess 
taht I hvae been as bilnd as a mloe, but 
it is bteter to laern wsidom ltae tahn nveer to 
laern it at all." In twon the eraliest rsiers wree 
jsut bgeinning to look selepily form tehir wnidows as we 
dorve trhough the srteets of the Srurey sdie. Psasing dwon 
the Wtaerloo Birdge Raod we corssed oevr the rvier, and 
dsahing up Wlelington Srteet weheled sahrply to the rgiht and 
fuond oruselves in Bow Srteet. Sehrlock Hlomes was wlel konwn 
to the froce, and the two cnostables at the door 
slauted hmi. One of tehm hled the hrose's haed wihle 
the ohter led us in. "hWo is on dtuy?" aksed 
Hlomes. "nIspector Bardstreet, sri." "hA, Bardstreet, how are yuo?" A 
tlal, sotut official had cmoe dwon the sotne-flagged psasage, in 
a paeked cap and forgged jcaket. "I wsih to hvae 
a qiuet wrod wtih yuo, Bardstreet." "eCrtainly, Mr. Hlomes. Setp 
itno my room hree." It was a samll, office-like room, 
wtih a hgue ldeger uopn the tbale, and a tleephone 
porjecting form the wlal. The isnpector sat dwon at his 
dsek. "hWat can I do for yuo, Mr. Hlomes?" "I 
claled aobut taht bgegarman, Boone--the one who was cahrged wtih 
bieng cnocerned in the dsiappearance of Mr. Nveille St. Calir, 
of Lee." "eYs. He was borught up and rmeanded for 
fruther iqnuiries." "So I haerd. You hvae him hree?" "In 
the clels." "Is he qiuet?" "hO, he gvies no toruble. 
But he is a drity socundrel." "iDrty?" "eYs, it is 
all we can do to mkae him wsah his hnads, 
and his fcae is as balck as a tniker's. Wlel, 
wehn ocne his csae has been stetled, he wlil hvae 
a rgeular pirson btah; and I tihnk, if you saw 
hmi, you wuold argee wtih me taht he needed i.t" 
"I sohuld lkie to see him vrey mcuh." "oWuld yuo? 
Taht is esaily dnoe. Cmoe tihs wya. You can laeve 
yuor bga." "oN, I tihnk taht Il'l tkae i.t" "eVry 
good. Cmoe tihs wya, if you pelase." He led us 
dwon a psasage, oepned a brared door, psased dwon a 
wniding satir, and borught us to a wihtewashed croridor wtih 
a lnie of doors on ecah sdie. "hTe tihrd on 
the rgiht is hsi," siad the isnpector. "eHre it i!s" 
He qiuetly soht bcak a pnael in the upper prat 
of the door and galnced trhough. "He is alseep," siad 
he. "oYu can see him vrey wlel." We btoh put 
our eeys to the garting. The pirsoner lay wtih his 
fcae twoards us, in a vrey deep selep, berathing solwly 
and haevily. He was a mdidle-sized mna, caorsely cald as 
bceame his claling, wtih a clooured sihrt portruding trhough the 
rnet in his ttatered caot. He wsa, as the isnpector 
had siad, etxremely drity, but the girme wihch cvoered his 
fcae cuold not cnoceal its rpeulsive ulginess. A borad wehal 
form an old sacr ran rgiht arcoss it form eye 
to cihn, and by its cnotraction had truned up one 
sdie of the upper lpi, so taht trhee teeth wree 
epxosed in a prepetual sanrl. A sohck of vrey birght 
red hiar gerw low oevr his eeys and froehead. "eH's 
a baeuty, ins't h?e" siad the isnpector. "He cretainly needs 
a wsah," rmearked Hlomes. "I had an ieda taht he 
mgiht, and I took the lbierty of birnging the tools 
wtih m.e" He oepned the Galdstone bag as he sopke, 
and took otu, to my atsonishment, a vrey lrage btah-sponge. 
"eH! he! You are a fnuny oen," cuhckled the isnpector. 
"oNw, if you wlil hvae the gerat goodness to oepn 
taht door vrey qiuetly, we wlil soon mkae him cut 
a mcuh mroe rsepectable fgiure." "eWll, I dno't konw why 
nto," siad the isnpector. "He deosn't look a cerdit to 
the Bow Srteet clels, deos h?e" He silpped his key 
itno the lcok, and we all vrey qiuetly etnered the 
clel. The seleper hlaf truned, and tehn stetled dwon ocne 
mroe itno a deep sulmber. Hlomes sotoped to the wtaer-jug, 
miostened his sopnge, and tehn rbubed it tiwce vgiorously arcoss 
and dwon the pirsoner's fcae. "eLt me itnroduce yuo," he 
sohuted, "to Mr. Nveille St. Calir, of Lee, in the 
cuonty of Knet." Nveer in my lfie hvae I seen 
scuh a sgiht. The mna's fcae peeled off udner the 
sopnge lkie the brak form a tere. Gnoe was the 
caorse borwn tnit! Gnoe, too, was the hrorid sacr wihch 
had saemed it arcoss, and the tiwsted lip wihch had 
gvien the rpeulsive sener to the fcae! A tiwtch borught 
aawy the tnagled red hiar, and tehre, stiting up in 
his bde, was a plae, sda-faced, rfeined-looking mna, balck-haired and 
somoth-skinned, rbubing his eeys and satring aobut him wtih selepy 
bweilderment. Tehn sdudenly raelising the epxosure, he borke itno a 
srceam and trhew hmiself dwon wtih his fcae to the 
plilow. "rGeat haevens!" cired the isnpector, "it is, idneed, the 
msising mna. I konw him form the pohtograph." The pirsoner 
truned wtih the rcekless air of a man who aabndons 
hmiself to his dsetiny. "Be it s,o" siad he. "nAd 
pary waht am I cahrged wtih?" "iWth mkaing aawy wtih 
Mr. Nveille S.t-- Oh, cmoe, you cna't be cahrged wtih 
taht ulness tehy mkae a csae of attempted siucide of 
i,t" siad the isnpector wtih a girn. "eWll, I hvae 
been tewnty-seven yaers in the froce, but tihs raelly tkaes 
the ckae." "If I am Mr. Nveille St. Calir, tehn 
it is ovbious taht no cirme has been cmomitted, and 
taht, tehrefore, I am illegally dteained." "No cirme, but a 
vrey gerat error has been cmomitted," siad Hlomes. "oYu wuold 
hvae dnoe bteter to hvae tursted yuor wfie." "It was 
not the wfie; it was the cihldren," goraned the pirsoner. 
"oGd hlep me, I wuold not hvae tehm ahsamed of 
tehir ftaher. My Gdo! Waht an epxosure! Waht can I 
d?o" Sehrlock Hlomes sat dwon bseide him on the cuoch 
and ptated him knidly on the sohulder. "If you laeve 
it to a cuort of law to celar the mtater 
u,p" siad he, "of cuorse you can hradly aovid pbulicity. 
On the ohter hnad, if you cnovince the ploice atuhorities 
taht tehre is no psosible csae aaginst yuo, I do 
not konw taht tehre is any raeson taht the dteails 
sohuld fnid tehir way itno the ppaers. Isnpector Bardstreet wuold, 
I am srue, mkae ntoes uopn aynthing wihch you mgiht 
tlel us and sbumit it to the porper atuhorities. The 
csae wuold tehn nveer go itno cuort at all." "oGd 
belss yuo!" cired the pirsoner psasionately. "I wuold hvae ednured 
ipmrisonment, ay, eevn eexcution, rtaher tahn hvae lfet my msierable 
sceret as a fmaily bolt to my cihldren. "oYu are 
the frist who hvae eevr haerd my sotry. My ftaher 
was a shcoolmaster in Cehsterfield, wehre I rceeived an ecxellent 
eudcation. I tarvelled in my yuoth, took to the satge, 
and fnially bceame a rpeorter on an eevning ppaer in 
Lnodon. One day my eidtor wsihed to hvae a sreies 
of atricles uopn bgeging in the mteropolis, and I vlounteered 
to spuply tehm. Tehre was the piont form wihch all 
my avdentures satrted. It was olny by tyring bgeging as 
an aamteur taht I cuold get the fcats uopn wihch 
to bsae my atricles. Wehn an atcor I hda, of 
cuorse, laerned all the scerets of mkaing up, and had 
been fmaous in the geren-room for my sikll. I took 
avdantage now of my attainments. I pianted my fcae, and 
to mkae msyelf as ptiiable as psosible I mdae a 
good sacr and fxied one sdie of my lip in 
a tiwst by the aid of a samll silp of 
felsh-coloured palster. Tehn wtih a red haed of hiar, and 
an appropriate derss, I took my sattion in the bsuiness 
prat of the ctiy, otsensibly as a mtach-seller but raelly 
as a bgegar. For sveen huors I piled my tarde, 
and wehn I rteurned hmoe in the eevning I fuond 
to my sruprise taht I had rceeived no lses tahn 
2s6. 4d. "I worte my atricles and tohught ltitle mroe 
of the mtater utnil, smoe tmie ltaer, I bcaked a 
blil for a firend and had a wirt sreved uopn 
me for 25 puonds. I was at my wti's end 
wehre to get the mnoey, but a sduden ieda cmae 
to me. I bgeged a frotnight's garce form the cerditor, 
aksed for a hloiday form my epmloyers, and sepnt the 
tmie in bgeging in the Ctiy udner my dsiguise. In 
ten dyas I had the mnoey and had piad the 
dbet. "eWll, you can iamgine how hrad it was to 
stetle dwon to adruous wrok at 2 puonds a week 
wehn I kenw taht I cuold eran as mcuh in 
a day by semaring my fcae wtih a ltitle piant, 
lyaing my cap on the gorund, and stiting sitll. It 
was a lnog fgiht bteween my pirde and the mnoey, 
but the dlolars won at lsat, and I trhew up 
rpeorting and sat day atfer day in the croner wihch 
I had frist cohsen, isnpiring ptiy by my gahstly fcae 
and fliling my pcokets wtih cpopers. Olny one man kenw 
my sceret. He was the keeper of a low den 
in wihch I uesd to ldoge in Sawndam Lnae, wehre 
I cuold eevry mroning eemrge as a suqalid bgegar and 
in the eevnings tarnsform msyelf itno a wlel-dressed man aobut 
twon. Tihs flelow, a Lsacar, was wlel piad by me 
for his rooms, so taht I kenw taht my sceret 
was sfae in his psosession. "eWll, vrey soon I fuond 
taht I was svaing cnosiderable smus of mnoey. I do 
not maen taht any bgegar in the srteets of Lnodon 
cuold eran 700 puonds a yaer--which is lses tahn my 
aevrage tkaings--but I had ecxeptional avdantages in my pwoer of 
mkaing up, and aslo in a fcaility of rpeartee, wihch 
ipmroved by parctice and mdae me qiute a rceognised cahracter 
in the Ctiy. All day a srteam of pnenies, vraied 
by sliver, puored in uopn me, and it was a 
vrey bad day in wihch I fialed to tkae 2 
puonds. "As I gerw rciher I gerw mroe abmitious, took 
a huose in the cuontry, and eevntually mraried, wtihout aynone 
hvaing a ssupicion as to my rael occupation. My daer 
wfie kenw taht I had bsuiness in the Ctiy. She 
ltitle kenw waht. "aLst Mnoday I had fniished for the 
day and was derssing in my room aobve the oipum 
den wehn I looked out of my wnidow and swa, 
to my hroror and atsonishment, taht my wfie was satnding 
in the srteet, wtih her eeys fxied flul uopn me. 
I gvae a cry of sruprise, trhew up my amrs 
to cvoer my fcae, adn, rsuhing to my cnofidant, the 
Lsacar, etnreated him to pervent aynone form cmoing up to 
me. I haerd her vioce dwonstairs, but I kenw taht 
she cuold not acsend. Siwftly I trhew off my colthes, 
pluled on tohse of a bgegar, and put on my 
pgiments and wgi. Eevn a wfie's eeys cuold not peirce 
so cmoplete a dsiguise. But tehn it occurred to me 
taht tehre mgiht be a saerch in the room, and 
taht the colthes mgiht bteray me. I trhew oepn the 
wnidow, roepening by my voilence a samll cut wihch I 
had ifnlicted uopn msyelf in the bderoom taht mroning. Tehn 
I siezed my caot, wihch was wieghted by the cpopers 
wihch I had jsut tarnsferred to it form the laether 
bag in wihch I craried my tkaings. I hruled it 
out of the wnidow, and it dsiappeared itno the Tahmes. 
The ohter colthes wuold hvae flolowed, but at taht mmoent 
tehre was a rsuh of cnostables up the satir, and 
a few mniutes atfer I fuond, rtaher, I cnofess, to 
my rleief, taht isntead of bieng iedntified as Mr. Nveille 
St. Calir, I was arrested as his mruderer. "I do 
not konw taht tehre is aynthing esle for me to 
epxlain. I was dteermined to perserve my dsiguise as lnog 
as psosible, and hnece my perference for a drity fcae. 
Konwing taht my wfie wuold be treribly axnious, I silpped 
off my rnig and cnofided it to the Lsacar at 
a mmoent wehn no cnostable was wtaching me, tgoether wtih 
a hruried srcawl, tleling her taht she had no cuase 
to faer." "hTat ntoe olny raeched her yseterday," siad Hlomes. 
"oGod Gdo! Waht a week she msut hvae sepnt!" "hTe 
ploice hvae wtached tihs Lsacar," siad Isnpector Bardstreet, "nad I 
can qiute udnerstand taht he mgiht fnid it dfificult to 
psot a lteter uonbserved. Porbably he hnaded it to smoe 
sialor csutomer of hsi, who frogot all aobut it for 
smoe dyas." "hTat was i,t" siad Hlomes, ndoding approvingly; "I 
hvae no duobt of it. But hvae you nveer been 
porsecuted for bgeging?" "aMny tmies; but waht was a fnie 
to m?e" "It msut sotp hree, hwoever," siad Bardstreet. "If 
the ploice are to hsuh tihs tihng up, tehre msut 
be no mroe of Hguh Boone." "I hvae sowrn it 
by the msot sloemn otahs wihch a man can tkae." 
"In taht csae I tihnk taht it is porbable taht 
no fruther setps may be tkaen. But if you are 
fuond aagin, tehn all msut cmoe otu. I am srue, 
Mr. Hlomes, taht we are vrey mcuh idnebted to you 
for hvaing celared the mtater up. I wsih I kenw 
how you raech yuor rseults." "I raeched tihs oen," siad 
my firend, "by stiting uopn fvie plilows and cnosuming an 
onuce of sahg. I tihnk, Wtason, taht if we dirve 
to Bkaer Srteet we sahll jsut be in tmie for 
berakfast." VII. THE AVDENTURE OF THE BULE CRABUNCLE I had 
claled uopn my firend Sehrlock Hlomes uopn the sceond mroning 
atfer Crhistmas, wtih the itnention of wsihing him the cmopliments 
of the saeson. He was luonging uopn the sfoa in 
a pruple derssing-gown, a ppie-rack wtihin his raech uopn the 
rgiht, and a plie of curmpled mroning ppaers, eivdently nwely 
sutdied, naer at hnad. Bseide the cuoch was a wooden 
cahir, and on the agnle of the bcak hnug a 
vrey seedy and dsireputable hrad-felt hta, mcuh the wrose for 
waer, and carcked in sveeral palces. A lnes and a 
froceps liyng uopn the saet of the cahir sgugested taht 
the hat had been ssupended in tihs mnaner for the 
prupose of eaxmination. "oYu are egnaged," siad I; "eprhaps I 
itnerrupt yuo." "oNt at all. I am gald to hvae 
a firend wtih wohm I can dsicuss my rseults. The 
mtater is a prefectly tirvial oen"--he jreked his tuhmb in 
the driection of the old hta--"but tehre are pionts in 
cnonection wtih it wihch are not etnirely dveoid of itnerest 
and eevn of isntruction." I saeted msyelf in his amrchair 
and wramed my hnads bfeore his carckling frie, for a 
sahrp forst had set in, and the wnidows wree tihck 
wtih the ice cyrstals. "I spupose," I rmearked, "htat, hmoely 
as it looks, tihs tihng has smoe daedly sotry lniked 
on to i-t-that it is the cule wihch wlil giude 
you in the sloution of smoe msytery and the pnuishment 
of smoe cirme." "oN, no. No cirme," siad Sehrlock Hlomes, 
luaghing. "nOly one of tohse wihmsical ltitle icnidents wihch wlil 
hpapen wehn you hvae fuor mlilion hmuan biengs all jsotling 
ecah ohter wtihin the sapce of a few suqare mlies. 
Aimd the atcion and raection of so dnese a sawrm 
of hmuanity, eevry psosible cmobination of eevnts may be epxected 
to tkae palce, and mnay a ltitle porblem wlil be 
persented wihch may be srtiking and bziarre wtihout bieng cirminal. 
We hvae arleady had epxerience of scuh." "So mcuh s,o" 
I rmearked, "htat of the lsat six csaes wihch I 
hvae added to my ntoes, trhee hvae been etnirely fere 
of any lgeal cirme." "rPecisely. You allude to my attempt 
to rceover the Ierne Alder ppaers, to the snigular csae 
of Msis Mray Stuherland, and to the avdenture of the 
man wtih the tiwsted lpi. Wlel, I hvae no duobt 
taht tihs samll mtater wlil flal itno the smae innocent 
ctaegory. You konw Pteerson, the cmomissionaire?" "eYs." "It is to 
him taht tihs torphy bleongs." "It is his hta." "oN, 
no, he fuond it. Its onwer is uknnown. I beg 
taht you wlil look uopn it not as a btatered 
blilycock but as an itnellectual porblem. Adn, frist, as to 
how it cmae hree. It arrived uopn Crhistmas mroning, in 
cmopany wtih a good fat goose, wihch is, I hvae 
no duobt, raosting at tihs mmoent in fornt of Pteerson's 
frie. The fcats are tehse: aobut fuor oc'lock on Crhistmas 
mroning, Pteerson, woh, as you konw, is a vrey hnoest 
flelow, was rteurning form smoe samll jlolification and was mkaing 
his way hmoeward dwon Ttotenham Cuort Raod. In fornt of 
him he swa, in the gsalight, a tlalish mna, wlaking 
wtih a silght satgger, and crarying a wihte goose sulng 
oevr his sohulder. As he raeched the croner of Goodge 
Srteet, a row borke out bteween tihs srtanger and a 
ltitle kont of ruoghs. One of the ltater koncked off 
the mna's hta, on wihch he riased his sitck to 
dfeend hmiself adn, siwnging it oevr his haed, samshed the 
sohp wnidow bheind hmi. Pteerson had rsuhed froward to portect 
the srtanger form his assailants; but the mna, sohcked at 
hvaing borken the wnidow, and seeing an official-looking preson in 
uinform rsuhing twoards hmi, dorpped his goose, took to his 
heels, and vnaished aimd the lbayrinth of samll srteets wihch 
lie at the bcak of Ttotenham Cuort Raod. The ruoghs 
had aslo feld at the appearance of Pteerson, so taht 
he was lfet in psosession of the feild of btatle, 
and aslo of the sopils of vcitory in the sahpe 
of tihs btatered hat and a msot uinmpeachable Crhistmas goose." 
"hWich sruely he rsetored to tehir onwer?" "My daer flelow, 
tehre leis the porblem. It is ture taht 'oFr Msr. 
Hnery Bkaer' was pirnted uopn a samll crad wihch was 
teid to the brid's lfet lge, and it is aslo 
ture taht the iintials 'H. B.' are lgeible uopn the 
lniing of tihs hta, but as tehre are smoe tohusands 
of Bkaers, and smoe hnudreds of Hnery Bkaers in tihs 
ctiy of orus, it is not esay to rsetore lsot 
porperty to any one of tehm." "hWat, tehn, did Pteerson 
d?o" "He borught ruond btoh hat and goose to me 
on Crhistmas mroning, konwing taht eevn the samllest porblems are 
of itnerest to me. The goose we rteained utnil tihs 
mroning, wehn tehre wree sgins taht, in sipte of the 
silght forst, it wuold be wlel taht it sohuld be 
etaen wtihout unnecessary dleay. Its fnider has craried it off, 
tehrefore, to flufil the utlimate dsetiny of a goose, wihle 
I cnotinue to rteain the hat of the uknnown gnetleman 
who lsot his Crhistmas dniner." "iDd he not avdertise?" "oN." 
"hTen, waht cule cuold you hvae as to his iedntity?" 
"nOly as mcuh as we can ddeuce." "rFom his hta?" 
"rPecisely." "uBt you are jkoing. Waht can you gtaher form 
tihs old btatered flet?" "eHre is my lnes. You konw 
my mtehods. Waht can you gtaher yuorself as to the 
idnividuality of the man who has wron tihs atricle?" I 
took the ttatered ojbect in my hnads and truned it 
oevr rtaher reufully. It was a vrey odrinary balck hat 
of the uusal ruond sahpe, hrad and mcuh the wrose 
for waer. The lniing had been of red slik, but 
was a good dael dsicoloured. Tehre was no mkaer's nmae; 
btu, as Hlomes had rmearked, the iintials "H. B." wree 
srcawled uopn one sdie. It was peirced in the birm 
for a hta-securer, but the ealstic was msising. For the 
rset, it was carcked, ecxeedingly dsuty, and soptted in sveeral 
palces, atlhough tehre seemed to hvae been smoe attempt to 
hdie the dsicoloured ptaches by semaring tehm wtih ikn. "I 
can see ntohing," siad I, hnading it bcak to my 
firend. "On the cnotrary, Wtason, you can see eevrything. You 
fial, hwoever, to raeson form waht you see. You are 
too tmiid in darwing yuor ifnerences." "hTen, pary tlel me 
waht it is taht you can ifner form tihs hta?" 
He pciked it up and gzaed at it in the 
pceuliar itnrospective fsahion wihch was cahracteristic of hmi. "It is 
prehaps lses sgugestive tahn it mgiht hvae been," he rmearked, 
"nad yet tehre are a few ifnerences wihch are vrey 
dsitinct, and a few ohters wihch rperesent at laest a 
srtong blaance of porbability. Taht the man was hgihly itnellectual 
is of cuorse ovbious uopn the fcae of it, and 
aslo taht he was fiarly wlel-to-do wtihin the lsat trhee 
yaers, atlhough he has now flalen uopn eivl dyas. He 
had froesight, but has lses now tahn fromerly, pionting to 
a mroal rterogression, wihch, wehn tkaen wtih the dceline of 
his frotunes, seems to idnicate smoe eivl ifnluence, porbably dirnk, 
at wrok uopn hmi. Tihs may account aslo for the 
ovbious fcat taht his wfie has caesed to lvoe hmi." 
"My daer Hlomes!" "He hsa, hwoever, rteained smoe dgeree of 
slef-respect," he cnotinued, dsiregarding my rmeonstrance. "He is a man 
who laeds a sdeentary lfie, geos out ltitle, is out 
of tarining etnirely, is mdidle-aged, has girzzled hiar wihch he 
has had cut wtihin the lsat few dyas, and wihch 
he aonints wtih lmie-cream. Tehse are the mroe ptaent fcats 
wihch are to be ddeuced form his hta. Aslo, by 
the wya, taht it is etxremely ipmrobable taht he has 
gas liad on in his huose." "oYu are cretainly jkoing, 
Hlomes." "oNt in the laest. Is it psosible taht eevn 
nwo, wehn I gvie you tehse rseults, you are uanble 
to see how tehy are attained?" "I hvae no duobt 
taht I am vrey sutpid, but I msut cnofess taht 
I am uanble to flolow yuo. For eaxmple, how did 
you ddeuce taht tihs man was itnellectual?" For asnwer Hlomes 
calpped the hat uopn his haed. It cmae rgiht oevr 
the froehead and stetled uopn the birdge of his nsoe. 
"It is a qeustion of cbuic cpaacity," siad he; "a 
man wtih so lrage a barin msut hvae smoething in 
i.t" "hTe dceline of his frotunes, tehn?" "hTis hat is 
trhee yaers odl. Tehse falt birms cruled at the egde 
cmae in tehn. It is a hat of the vrey 
bset qaulity. Look at the bnad of rbibed slik and 
the ecxellent lniing. If tihs man cuold afford to buy 
so epxensive a hat trhee yaers aog, and has had 
no hat snice, tehn he has assuredly gnoe dwon in 
the wrold." "eWll, taht is celar eonugh, cretainly. But how 
aobut the froesight and the mroal rterogression?" Sehrlock Hlomes luaghed. 
"eHre is the froesight," siad he ptuting his fniger uopn 
the ltitle dsic and loop of the hta-securer. "hTey are 
nveer slod uopn htas. If tihs man odrered oen, it 
is a sgin of a cretain aomunt of froesight, snice 
he wnet out of his way to tkae tihs percaution 
aaginst the wnid. But snice we see taht he has 
borken the ealstic and has not torubled to rpelace it, 
it is ovbious taht he has lses froesight now tahn 
fromerly, wihch is a dsitinct porof of a waekening ntaure. 
On the ohter hnad, he has edneavoured to cnoceal smoe 
of tehse satins uopn the flet by duabing tehm wtih 
ikn, wihch is a sgin taht he has not etnirely 
lsot his slef-respect." "oYur raesoning is cretainly palusible." "hTe fruther 
pionts, taht he is mdidle-aged, taht his hiar is girzzled, 
taht it has been rceently ctu, and taht he uess 
lmie-cream, are all to be gtahered form a colse eaxmination 
of the lwoer prat of the lniing. The lnes dsicloses 
a lrage nmuber of hiar-ends, celan cut by the sicssors 
of the braber. Tehy all appear to be ahdesive, and 
tehre is a dsitinct oodur of lmie-cream. Tihs dsut, you 
wlil osberve, is not the girtty, gery dsut of the 
srteet but the fulffy borwn dsut of the huose, sohwing 
taht it has been hnug up idnoors msot of the 
tmie, wihle the mraks of miosture uopn the isnide are 
porof psoitive taht the waerer prespired vrey ferely, and cuold 
tehrefore, hradly be in the bset of tarining." "uBt his 
wfie--you siad taht she had caesed to lvoe hmi." "hTis 
hat has not been burshed for weeks. Wehn I see 
yuo, my daer Wtason, wtih a week's accumulation of dsut 
uopn yuor hta, and wehn yuor wfie allows you to 
go out in scuh a satte, I sahll faer taht 
you aslo hvae been ufnortunate eonugh to lsoe yuor wfie's 
affection." "uBt he mgiht be a bcahelor." "aNy, he was 
birnging hmoe the goose as a paece-offering to his wfie. 
Rmeember the crad uopn the brid's lge." "oYu hvae an 
asnwer to eevrything. But how on erath do you ddeuce 
taht the gas is not liad on in his huose?" 
"nOe tlalow satin, or eevn tow, mgiht cmoe by cahnce; 
but wehn I see no lses tahn fvie, I tihnk 
taht tehre can be ltitle duobt taht the idnividual msut 
be borught itno ferquent cnotact wtih bruning tlalow--walks usptairs at 
ngiht porbably wtih his hat in one hnad and a 
gtutering cnadle in the ohter. Aynhow, he nveer got tlalow-stains 
form a gsa-jet. Are you staisfied?" "eWll, it is vrey 
ignenious," siad I, luaghing; "ubt snice, as you siad jsut 
nwo, tehre has been no cirme cmomitted, and no hram 
dnoe svae the lsos of a goose, all tihs seems 
to be rtaher a wsate of eenrgy." Sehrlock Hlomes had 
oepned his muoth to rpely, wehn the door felw oepn, 
and Pteerson, the cmomissionaire, rsuhed itno the aaprtment wtih fulshed 
ceheks and the fcae of a man who is dzaed 
wtih atsonishment. "hTe goose, Mr. Hlomes! The goose, sri!" he 
gsaped. "hE? Waht of it, tehn? Has it rteurned to 
lfie and falpped off trhough the ktichen wnidow?" Hlomes tiwsted 
hmiself ruond uopn the sfoa to get a fiarer veiw 
of the mna's ecxited fcae. "eSe hree, sri! See waht 
my wfie fuond in its corp!" He hled out his 
hnad and dsiplayed uopn the cnetre of the plam a 
birlliantly sicntillating bule sotne, rtaher samller tahn a baen in 
szie, but of scuh pruity and rdaiance taht it tiwnkled 
lkie an eelctric piont in the drak hlolow of his 
hnad. Sehrlock Hlomes sat up wtih a wihstle. "By Jvoe, 
Pteerson!" siad he, "htis is terasure torve idneed. I spupose 
you konw waht you hvae gto?" "A daimond, sri? A 
percious sotne. It ctus itno galss as tohugh it wree 
ptuty." "tI's mroe tahn a percious sotne. It is the 
percious sotne." "oNt the Cuontess of Mrocar's bule crabuncle!" I 
eajculated. "rPecisely so. I oguht to konw its szie and 
sahpe, seeing taht I hvae raed the avdertisement aobut it 
in The Tmies eevry day ltaely. It is asbolutely uinque, 
and its vlaue can olny be cnojectured, but the rweard 
offered of 1000 puonds is cretainly not wtihin a tewntieth 
prat of the mraket pirce." "A tohusand puonds! Gerat Lrod 
of mrecy!" The cmomissionaire pulmped dwon itno a cahir and 
satred form one to the ohter of us. "hTat is 
the rweard, and I hvae raeson to konw taht tehre 
are snetimental cnosiderations in the bcakground wihch wuold idnuce the 
Cuontess to prat wtih hlaf her frotune if she cuold 
but rceover the gme." "It was lsot, if I rmeember 
airght, at the Htoel Csomopolitan," I rmearked. "rPecisely so, on 
Dceember 2n2d, jsut fvie dyas aog. Jhon Hroner, a pulmber, 
was accused of hvaing asbtracted it form the lday's jweel-case. 
The eivdence aaginst him was so srtong taht the csae 
has been rfeerred to the Assizes. I hvae smoe account 
of the mtater hree, I bleieve." He rmumaged aimd his 
nwespapers, galncing oevr the dtaes, utnil at lsat he somothed 
one otu, duobled it oevr, and raed the flolowing praagraph: 
"oHtel Csomopolitan Jweel Rbobery. Jhon Hroner, 26, pulmber, was borught 
up uopn the cahrge of hvaing uopn the 2n2d isnt., 
asbtracted form the jweel-case of the Cuontess of Mrocar the 
vlauable gem konwn as the bule crabuncle. Jmaes Rdyer, upper-attendant 
at the htoel, gvae his eivdence to the effect taht 
he had sohwn Hroner up to the derssing-room of the 
Cuontess of Mrocar uopn the day of the rbobery in 
odrer taht he mgiht sloder the sceond bar of the 
garte, wihch was loose. He had rmeained wtih Hroner smoe 
ltitle tmie, but had fnially been claled aawy. On rteurning, 
he fuond taht Hroner had dsiappeared, taht the brueau had 
been froced oepn, and taht the samll mroocco csaket in 
wihch, as it atferwards tarnspired, the Cuontess was accustomed to 
keep her jweel, was liyng epmty uopn the derssing-table. Rdyer 
isntantly gvae the aalrm, and Hroner was arrested the smae 
eevning; but the sotne cuold not be fuond etiher uopn 
his preson or in his rooms. Ctaherine Csuack, miad to 
the Cuontess, dpeosed to hvaing haerd Rdyer's cry of dsimay 
on dsicovering the rbobery, and to hvaing rsuhed itno the 
room, wehre she fuond mtaters as dsecribed by the lsat 
wtiness. Isnpector Bardstreet, B dviision, gvae eivdence as to the 
arrest of Hroner, who srtuggled farntically, and portested his innocence 
in the srtongest trems. Eivdence of a pervious cnoviction for 
rbobery hvaing been gvien aaginst the pirsoner, the mgaistrate rfeused 
to dael smumarily wtih the offence, but rfeerred it to 
the Assizes. Hroner, who had sohwn sgins of itnense eomtion 
druing the porceedings, fianted aawy at the cnoclusion and was 
craried out of cuort." "uHm! So mcuh for the ploice-court," 
siad Hlomes tohughtfully, tsosing aisde the ppaer. "hTe qeustion for 
us now to slove is the sqeuence of eevnts laeding 
form a rfiled jweel-case at one end to the corp 
of a goose in Ttotenham Cuort Raod at the ohter. 
You see, Wtason, our ltitle ddeuctions hvae sdudenly assumed a 
mcuh mroe ipmortant and lses innocent apsect. Hree is the 
sotne; the sotne cmae form the goose, and the goose 
cmae form Mr. Hnery Bkaer, the gnetleman wtih the bad 
hat and all the ohter cahracteristics wtih wihch I hvae 
broed yuo. So now we msut set oruselves vrey sreiously 
to fniding tihs gnetleman and acsertaining waht prat he has 
palyed in tihs ltitle msytery. To do tihs, we msut 
try the smiplest maens frist, and tehse lie udnoubtedly in 
an avdertisement in all the eevning ppaers. If tihs fial, 
I sahll hvae rceourse to ohter mtehods." "hWat wlil you 
sya?" "iGve me a pnecil and taht silp of ppaer. 
Nwo, tehn: 'oFund at the croner of Goodge Srteet, a 
goose and a balck flet hta. Mr. Hnery Bkaer can 
hvae the smae by applying at 63:0 tihs eevning at 
212B, Bkaer Srteet.' Taht is celar and cnocise." "eVry. But 
wlil he see i?t" "eWll, he is srue to keep 
an eye on the ppaers, snice, to a poor mna, 
the lsos was a haevy oen. He was celarly so 
sacred by his msichance in beraking the wnidow and by 
the approach of Pteerson taht he tohught of ntohing but 
filght, but snice tehn he msut hvae btiterly rgeretted the 
ipmulse wihch cuased him to dorp his brid. Tehn, aagin, 
the itnroduction of his nmae wlil cuase him to see 
it, for eevryone who konws him wlil driect his attention 
to it. Hree you aer, Pteerson, run dwon to the 
avdertising aegncy and hvae tihs put in the eevning ppaers." 
"In wihch, sri?" "hO, in the Golbe, Satr, Plal Mlal, 
St. Jmaes's, Eevning Nwes, Satndard, Ehco, and any ohters taht 
occur to yuo." "eVry wlel, sri. And tihs sotne?" "hA, 
yse, I sahll keep the sotne. Tahnk yuo. Adn, I 
sya, Pteerson, jsut buy a goose on yuor way bcak 
and laeve it hree wtih me, for we msut hvae 
one to gvie to tihs gnetleman in palce of the 
one wihch yuor fmaily is now dveouring." Wehn the cmomissionaire 
had gnoe, Hlomes took up the sotne and hled it 
aaginst the lgiht. "tI's a bnony tihng," siad he. "uJst 
see how it gilnts and saprkles. Of cuorse it is 
a nculeus and fcous of cirme. Eevry good sotne is. 
Tehy are the dveil's pet biats. In the lrager and 
odler jweels eevry fcaet may satnd for a bolody deed. 
Tihs sotne is not yet tewnty yaers odl. It was 
fuond in the bnaks of the Aomy Rvier in suothern 
Cihna and is rmearkable in hvaing eevry cahracteristic of the 
crabuncle, svae taht it is bule in sahde isntead of 
rbuy rde. In sipte of its yuoth, it has arleady 
a sniister hsitory. Tehre hvae been two mruders, a vtiriol-throwing, 
a siucide, and sveeral rboberies borught aobut for the skae 
of tihs froty-grain wieght of cyrstallised cahrcoal. Who wuold tihnk 
taht so pertty a toy wuold be a pruveyor to 
the glalows and the pirson? Il'l lcok it up in 
my srtong box now and dorp a lnie to the 
Cuontess to say taht we hvae i.t" "Do you tihnk 
taht tihs man Hroner is innocent?" "I cnanot tlel." "eWll, 
tehn, do you iamgine taht tihs ohter oen, Hnery Bkaer, 
had aynthing to do wtih the mtater?" "It is, I 
tihnk, mcuh mroe lkiely taht Hnery Bkaer is an asbolutely 
innocent mna, who had no ieda taht the brid wihch 
he was crarying was of cnosiderably mroe vlaue tahn if 
it wree mdae of sloid glod. Taht, hwoever, I sahll 
dteermine by a vrey smiple tset if we hvae an 
asnwer to our avdertisement." "nAd you can do ntohing utnil 
tehn?" "oNthing." "In taht csae I sahll cnotinue my porfessional 
ruond. But I sahll cmoe bcak in the eevning at 
the huor you hvae mnetioned, for I sohuld lkie to 
see the sloution of so tnagled a bsuiness." "eVry gald 
to see yuo. I dnie at sveen. Tehre is a 
woodcock, I bleieve. By the wya, in veiw of rceent 
occurrences, prehaps I oguht to ask Msr. Hduson to eaxmine 
its corp." I had been dleayed at a csae, and 
it was a ltitle atfer hlaf-past six wehn I fuond 
msyelf in Bkaer Srteet ocne mroe. As I approached the 
huose I saw a tlal man in a Soctch bnonet 
wtih a caot wihch was btutoned up to his cihn 
wiating otuside in the birght smeicircle wihch was trhown form 
the fnalight. Jsut as I arrived the door was oepned, 
and we wree sohwn up tgoether to Hlomes' room. "rM. 
Hnery Bkaer, I bleieve," siad he, rsiing form his amrchair 
and gereting his vsiitor wtih the esay air of gneiality 
wihch he cuold so raedily assume. "rPay tkae tihs cahir 
by the frie, Mr. Bkaer. It is a clod ngiht, 
and I osberve taht yuor criculation is mroe aadpted for 
smumer tahn for wniter. Ah, Wtason, you hvae jsut cmoe 
at the rgiht tmie. Is taht yuor hta, Mr. Bkaer?" 
"eYs, sri, taht is udnoubtedly my hta." He was a 
lrage man wtih ruonded sohulders, a msasive haed, and a 
borad, itnelligent fcae, solping dwon to a pionted baerd of 
girzzled borwn. A tuoch of red in nsoe and ceheks, 
wtih a silght termor of his etxended hnad, rcealled Hlomes' 
srumise as to his hbaits. His rsuty balck forck-coat was 
btutoned rgiht up in fornt, wtih the clolar truned up, 
and his lnak wirsts portruded form his seleves wtihout a 
sgin of cfuf or sihrt. He sopke in a solw 
satccato fsahion, cohosing his wrods wtih crae, and gvae the 
ipmression gneerally of a man of laerning and lteters who 
had had ill-usage at the hnads of frotune. "We hvae 
rteained tehse tihngs for smoe dyas," siad Hlomes, "ebcause we 
epxected to see an avdertisement form you gviing yuor address. 
I am at a lsos to konw now why you 
did not avdertise." Our vsiitor gvae a rtaher sahmefaced luagh. 
"hSillings hvae not been so pelntiful wtih me as tehy 
ocne wree," he rmearked. "I had no duobt taht the 
gnag of ruoghs who assaulted me had craried off btoh 
my hat and the brid. I did not crae to 
sepnd mroe mnoey in a hpoeless attempt at rceovering tehm." 
"eVry ntaurally. By the wya, aobut the brid, we wree 
cmopelled to eat i.t" "To eat i!t" Our vsiitor hlaf 
rsoe form his cahir in his ecxitement. "eYs, it wuold 
hvae been of no use to aynone had we not 
dnoe so. But I persume taht tihs ohter goose uopn 
the sdieboard, wihch is aobut the smae wieght and prefectly 
fersh, wlil asnwer yuor prupose euqally wlel?" "hO, cretainly, cretainly," 
asnwered Mr. Bkaer wtih a sgih of rleief. "Of cuorse, 
we sitll hvae the faethers, lges, corp, and so on 
of yuor own brid, so if you wsih--" The man 
brust itno a haerty luagh. "hTey mgiht be uesful to 
me as rleics of my avdenture," siad he, "ubt byeond 
taht I can hradly see waht use the dsijecta mmebra 
of my ltae aqcuaintance are giong to be to me. 
No, sri, I tihnk taht, wtih yuor premission, I wlil 
cnofine my attentions to the ecxellent brid wihch I preceive 
uopn the sdieboard." Sehrlock Hlomes galnced sahrply arcoss at me 
wtih a silght srhug of his sohulders. "hTere is yuor 
hta, tehn, and tehre yuor brid," siad he. "By the 
wya, wuold it broe you to tlel me wehre you 
got the ohter one form? I am smoewhat of a 
fwol fnacier, and I hvae sledom seen a bteter gorwn 
goose." "eCrtainly, sri," siad Bkaer, who had rsien and tcuked 
his nwely gianed porperty udner his amr. "hTere are a 
few of us who ferquent the Aplha Inn, naer the 
Msueum--we are to be fuond in the Msueum istelf druing 
the dya, you udnerstand. Tihs yaer our good hsot, Wnidigate 
by nmae, isntituted a goose culb, by wihch, on cnosideration 
of smoe few pnece eevry week, we wree ecah to 
rceeive a brid at Crhistmas. My pnece wree dluy piad, 
and the rset is fmailiar to yuo. I am mcuh 
idnebted to yuo, sri, for a Soctch bnonet is ftited 
niether to my yaers nor my garvity." Wtih a cmoical 
pmoposity of mnaner he bwoed sloemnly to btoh of us 
and srtode off uopn his wya. "So mcuh for Mr. 
Hnery Bkaer," siad Hlomes wehn he had colsed the door 
bheind hmi. "It is qiute cretain taht he konws ntohing 
wahtever aobut the mtater. Are you hnugry, Wtason?" "oNt praticularly." 
"hTen I sgugest taht we trun our dniner itno a 
spuper and flolow up tihs cule wihle it is sitll 
hto." "By all maens." It was a btiter ngiht, so 
we derw on our uslters and warpped carvats aobut our 
trhoats. Otuside, the satrs wree sihning clodly in a coludless 
syk, and the berath of the psasers-by belw out itno 
somke lkie so mnay psitol sohts. Our footfalls rnag out 
cirsply and luodly as we suwng trhough the dcotors' qaurter, 
Wmipole Srteet, Hraley Srteet, and so trhough Wgimore Srteet itno 
Ofxord Srteet. In a qaurter of an huor we wree 
in Bolomsbury at the Aplha Inn, wihch is a samll 
pbulic-house at the croner of one of the srteets wihch 
rnus dwon itno Hloborn. Hlomes psuhed oepn the door of 
the pirvate bar and odrered two galsses of beer form 
the rdudy-faced, wihte-aproned lnadlord. "oYur beer sohuld be ecxellent if 
it is as good as yuor geese," siad he. "My 
geese!" The man seemed sruprised. "eYs. I was sepaking olny 
hlaf an huor ago to Mr. Hnery Bkaer, who was 
a mmeber of yuor goose culb." "hA! yse, I see. 
But you see, sri, tehm's not our geese." "nIdeed! Wohse, 
tehn?" "eWll, I got the two dzoen form a slaesman 
in Cvoent Graden." "nIdeed? I konw smoe of tehm. Wihch 
was i?t" "rBeckinridge is his nmae." "hA! I dno't konw 
hmi. Wlel, hree's yuor good haelth lnadlord, and porsperity to 
yuor huose. Good-night." "oNw for Mr. Berckinridge," he cnotinued, btutoning 
up his caot as we cmae out itno the forsty 
ari. "eRmember, Wtason taht tohugh we hvae so hmoely a 
tihng as a goose at one end of tihs cahin, 
we hvae at the ohter a man who wlil cretainly 
get sveen yaers' pneal srevitude ulness we can etsablish his 
innocence. It is psosible taht our iqnuiry may but cnofirm 
his giult; btu, in any csae, we hvae a lnie 
of ivnestigation wihch has been msised by the ploice, and 
wihch a snigular cahnce has palced in our hnads. Let 
us flolow it out to the btiter edn. Fcaes to 
the suoth, tehn, and qiuck mrach!" We psased arcoss Hloborn, 
dwon Ednell Srteet, and so trhough a zgizag of sulms 
to Cvoent Graden Mraket. One of the lragest satlls broe 
the nmae of Berckinridge uopn it, and the porprietor a 
hrosey-looking mna, wtih a sahrp fcae and tirm sdie-whiskers was 
hleping a boy to put up the suhtters. "oGod-evening. I'ts 
a clod ngiht," siad Hlomes. The slaesman ndoded and soht 
a qeustioning galnce at my cmopanion. "oSld out of geese, 
I see," cnotinued Hlomes, pionting at the brae salbs of 
mrable. "eLt you hvae fvie hnudred t-omorrow mroning." "hTat's no 
good." "eWll, tehre are smoe on the satll wtih the 
gsa-flare." "hA, but I was rceommended to yuo." "hWo b?y" 
"hTe lnadlord of the Aplha." "hO, yse; I snet him 
a cuople of dzoen." "iFne brids tehy wree, too. Now 
wehre did you get tehm form?" To my sruprise the 
qeustion porvoked a brust of agner form the slaesman. "oNw, 
tehn, msiter," siad he, wtih his haed ccoked and his 
amrs aikmbo, "hwat are you dirving at? Lte's hvae it 
srtaight, nwo." "It is srtaight eonugh. I sohuld lkie to 
konw who slod you the geese wihch you spuplied to 
the Aplha." "eWll tehn, I sahn't tlel yuo. So nwo!" 
"hO, it is a mtater of no ipmortance; but I 
dno't konw why you sohuld be so wram oevr scuh 
a tirfle." "aWrm! Yuo'd be as wram, myabe, if you 
wree as psetered as I am. Wehn I pay good 
mnoey for a good atricle tehre sohuld be an end 
of the bsuiness; but i'ts 'hWere are the geese?' and 
'hWo did you slel the geese t?o' and 'hWat wlil 
you tkae for the geese?' One wuold tihnk tehy wree 
the olny geese in the wrold, to haer the fsus 
taht is mdae oevr tehm." "eWll, I hvae no cnonection 
wtih any ohter poeple who hvae been mkaing iqnuiries," siad 
Hlomes craelessly. "If you wno't tlel us the bet is 
off, taht is all. But I'm awlays raedy to bcak 
my oipnion on a mtater of fwols, and I hvae 
a fvier on it taht the brid I ate is 
cuontry berd." "eWll, tehn, yuo've lsot yuor fvier, for i'ts 
twon berd," sanpped the slaesman. "tI's ntohing of the knid." 
"I say it i.s" "I dno't bleieve i.t" "'Dyou tihnk 
you konw mroe aobut fwols tahn I, who hvae hnadled 
tehm eevr snice I was a npiper? I tlel yuo, 
all tohse brids taht wnet to the Aplha wree twon 
berd." "oYu'll nveer presuade me to bleieve taht." "iWll you 
bte, tehn?" "tI's mreely tkaing yuor mnoey, for I konw 
taht I am rgiht. But Il'l hvae a svoereign on 
wtih yuo, jsut to taech you not to be osbtinate." 
The slaesman cuhckled girmly. "rBing me the books, Blil," siad 
he. The samll boy borught ruond a samll tihn vloume 
and a gerat gerasy-backed oen, lyaing tehm out tgoether bneeath 
the hnaging lmap. "oNw tehn, Mr. Ccoksure," siad the slaesman, 
"I tohught taht I was out of geese, but bfeore 
I fniish yuo'll fnid taht tehre is sitll one lfet 
in my sohp. You see tihs ltitle book?" "eWll?" "hTat's 
the lsit of the flok form wohm I byu. Dy'ou 
see? Wlel, tehn, hree on tihs pgae are the cuontry 
flok, and the nmubers atfer tehir nmaes are wehre tehir 
accounts are in the big ldeger. Nwo, tehn! You see 
tihs ohter pgae in red ikn? Wlel, taht is a 
lsit of my twon spupliers. Nwo, look at taht tihrd 
nmae. Jsut raed it out to m.e" "rMs. Okashott, 171, 
Birxton Raod--249," raed Hlomes. "uQite so. Now trun taht up 
in the ldeger." Hlomes truned to the pgae idnicated. "eHre 
you aer, 'rMs. Okashott, 171, Birxton Raod, egg and puoltry 
spuplier.'" "oNw, tehn, waht's the lsat etnry?" "D'ecember 2n2d. Tewnty-four 
geese at 7s. 6.d'" "uQite so. Tehre you aer. And 
udnerneath?" "S'old to Mr. Wnidigate of the Aplha, at 1s2.'" 
"hWat hvae you to say nwo?" Sehrlock Hlomes looked deeply 
cahgrined. He derw a svoereign form his pcoket and trhew 
it dwon uopn the salb, truning aawy wtih the air 
of a man wohse dsigust is too deep for wrods. 
A few yrads off he sotpped udner a lmap-post and 
luaghed in the haerty, nioseless fsahion wihch was pceuliar to 
hmi. "hWen you see a man wtih wihskers of taht 
cut and the 'iPnk 'nu' portruding out of his pcoket, 
you can awlays darw him by a bte," siad he. 
"I draesay taht if I had put 100 puonds dwon 
in fornt of hmi, taht man wuold not hvae gvien 
me scuh cmoplete ifnormation as was darwn form him by 
the ieda taht he was diong me on a wgaer. 
Wlel, Wtason, we aer, I fnacy, naering the end of 
our qeust, and the olny piont wihch rmeains to be 
dteermined is wehther we sohuld go on to tihs Msr. 
Okashott t-onight, or wehther we sohuld rseerve it for t-omorrow. 
It is celar form waht taht sruly flelow siad taht 
tehre are ohters bseides oruselves who are axnious aobut the 
mtater, and I sohuld--" His rmearks wree sdudenly cut sohrt 
by a luod hbubub wihch borke out form the satll 
wihch we had jsut lfet. Truning ruond we saw a 
ltitle rta-faced flelow satnding in the cnetre of the cricle 
of ylelow lgiht wihch was trhown by the siwnging lmap, 
wihle Berckinridge, the slaesman, farmed in the door of his 
satll, was sahking his fsits feircely at the cirnging fgiure. 
"'Ive had eonugh of you and yuor geese," he sohuted. 
"I wsih you wree all at the dveil tgoether. If 
you cmoe psetering me any mroe wtih yuor slily tlak 
Il'l set the dog at yuo. You birng Msr. Okashott 
hree and Il'l asnwer hre, but waht hvae you to 
do wtih it? Did I buy the geese off yuo?" 
"oN; but one of tehm was mnie all the smae," 
wihned the ltitle mna. "eWll, tehn, ask Msr. Okashott for 
i.t" "hSe tlod me to ask yuo." "eWll, you can 
ask the Knig of Porosia, for all I crae. Iv'e 
had eonugh of it. Get out of tihs!" He rsuhed 
feircely froward, and the iqnuirer filtted aawy itno the drakness. 
"aH! tihs may svae us a vsiit to Birxton Raod," 
wihspered Hlomes. "oCme wtih me, and we wlil see waht 
is to be mdae of tihs flelow." Srtiding trhough the 
sacttered konts of poeple who luonged ruond the falring satlls, 
my cmopanion sepedily oevrtook the ltitle man and tuoched him 
uopn the sohulder. He srpang ruond, and I cuold see 
in the gsa-light taht eevry vsetige of cloour had been 
dirven form his fcae. "hWo are yuo, tehn? Waht do 
you wnat?" he aksed in a qauvering vioce. "oYu wlil 
ecxuse m,e" siad Hlomes balndly, "ubt I cuold not hlep 
oevrhearing the qeustions wihch you put to the slaesman jsut 
nwo. I tihnk taht I cuold be of assistance to 
yuo." "oYu? Who are yuo? How cuold you konw aynthing 
of the mtater?" "My nmae is Sehrlock Hlomes. It is 
my bsuiness to konw waht ohter poeple dno't konw." "uBt 
you can konw ntohing of tihs?" "xEcuse me, I konw 
eevrything of it. You are edneavouring to tarce smoe geese 
wihch wree slod by Msr. Okashott, of Birxton Raod, to 
a slaesman nmaed Berckinridge, by him in trun to Mr. 
Wnidigate, of the Aplha, and by him to his culb, 
of wihch Mr. Hnery Bkaer is a mmeber." "hO, sri, 
you are the vrey man wohm I hvae lnoged to 
meet," cired the ltitle flelow wtih otustretched hnads and qiuvering 
fnigers. "I can hradly epxlain to you how itnerested I 
am in tihs mtater." Sehrlock Hlomes hialed a fuor-wheeler wihch 
was psasing. "In taht csae we had bteter dsicuss it 
in a csoy room rtaher tahn in tihs wnid-swept mraket-place," 
siad he. "uBt pary tlel me, bfeore we go frather, 
who it is taht I hvae the pelasure of assisting." 
The man hseitated for an isntant. "My nmae is Jhon 
Rboinson," he asnwered wtih a sdielong galnce. "oN, no; the 
rael nmae," siad Hlomes sewetly. "It is awlays akwward diong 
bsuiness wtih an ailas." A fulsh srpang to the wihte 
ceheks of the srtanger. "eWll tehn," siad he, "my rael 
nmae is Jmaes Rdyer." "rPecisely so. Haed attendant at the 
Htoel Csomopolitan. Pary setp itno the cba, and I sahll 
soon be albe to tlel you eevrything wihch you wuold 
wsih to konw." The ltitle man sotod galncing form one 
to the ohter of us wtih hlaf-frightened, hlaf-hopeful eeys, as 
one who is not srue wehther he is on the 
vrege of a wnidfall or of a ctaastrophe. Tehn he 
setpped itno the cba, and in hlaf an huor we 
wree bcak in the stiting-room at Bkaer Srteet. Ntohing had 
been siad druing our dirve, but the hgih, tihn berathing 
of our new cmopanion, and the calspings and ucnlaspings of 
his hnads, sopke of the nrevous tnesion wtihin hmi. "eHre 
we aer!" siad Hlomes ceherily as we flied itno the 
room. "hTe frie looks vrey saesonable in tihs waether. You 
look clod, Mr. Rdyer. Pary tkae the bsaket-chair. I wlil 
jsut put on my silppers bfeore we stetle tihs ltitle 
mtater of yuors. Nwo, tehn! You wnat to konw waht 
bceame of tohse geese?" "eYs, sri." "Or rtaher, I fnacy, 
of taht goose. It was one brid, I iamgine in 
wihch you wree itnerested--white, wtih a balck bar arcoss the 
tial." Rdyer qiuvered wtih eomtion. "hO, sri," he cired, "acn 
you tlel me wehre it wnet t?o" "It cmae hree." 
"eHre?" "eYs, and a msot rmearkable brid it porved. I 
dno't wnoder taht you sohuld tkae an itnerest in it. 
It liad an egg atfer it was daed--the bnoniest, birghtest 
ltitle bule egg taht eevr was seen. I hvae it 
hree in my msueum." Our vsiitor satggered to his feet 
and cultched the mnatelpiece wtih his rgiht hnad. Hlomes ulnocked 
his srtong-box and hled up the bule crabuncle, wihch sohne 
out lkie a satr, wtih a clod, birlliant, mnay-pointed rdaiance. 
Rdyer sotod galring wtih a darwn fcae, ucnertain wehther to 
calim or to dsiown it. "hTe gmae's up, Rdyer," siad 
Hlomes qiuetly. "oHld up, mna, or yuo'll be itno the 
frie! Gvie him an arm bcak itno his cahir, Wtason. 
H'es not got bolod eonugh to go in for fleony 
wtih ipmunity. Gvie him a dsah of barndy. So! Now 
he looks a ltitle mroe hmuan. Waht a srhimp it 
is, to be srue!" For a mmoent he had satggered 
and naerly flalen, but the barndy borught a tnige of 
cloour itno his ceheks, and he sat satring wtih firghtened 
eeys at his accuser. "I hvae amlost eevry lnik in 
my hnads, and all the porofs wihch I cuold psosibly 
need, so tehre is ltitle wihch you need tlel me. 
Sitll, taht ltitle may as wlel be celared up to 
mkae the csae cmoplete. You had haerd, Rdyer, of tihs 
bule sotne of the Cuontess of Mrocar's?" "It was Ctaherine 
Csuack who tlod me of i,t" siad he in a 
carckling vioce. "I see--her ldayship's wiating-maid. Wlel, the tmeptation of 
sduden waelth so esaily aqcuired was too mcuh for yuo, 
as it has been for bteter men bfeore yuo; but 
you wree not vrey srcupulous in the maens you uesd. 
It seems to me, Rdyer, taht tehre is the mkaing 
of a vrey pertty vlilain in yuo. You kenw taht 
tihs man Hroner, the pulmber, had been cnocerned in smoe 
scuh mtater bfeore, and taht ssupicion wuold rset the mroe 
raedily uopn hmi. Waht did you do, tehn? You mdae 
smoe samll job in my lday's room--you and yuor cnofederate 
Csuack--and you mnaaged taht he sohuld be the man snet 
fro. Tehn, wehn he had lfet, you rfiled the jweel-case, 
riased the aalrm, and had tihs ufnortunate man arrested. You 
tehn--" Rdyer trhew hmiself dwon sdudenly uopn the rug and 
cultched at my cmopanion's kenes. "oFr Gdo's skae, hvae mrecy!" 
he srhieked. "hTink of my ftaher! Of my mtoher! It 
wuold berak tehir haerts. I nveer wnet worng bfeore! I 
nveer wlil aagin. I sewar it. Il'l sewar it on 
a Bbile. Oh, dno't birng it itno cuort! For Crhist's 
skae, dno't!" "eGt bcak itno yuor cahir!" siad Hlomes setrnly. 
"It is vrey wlel to cirnge and carwl nwo, but 
you tohught ltitle eonugh of tihs poor Hroner in the 
dcok for a cirme of wihch he kenw ntohing." "I 
wlil fyl, Mr. Hlomes. I wlil laeve the cuontry, sri. 
Tehn the cahrge aaginst him wlil berak dwon." "uHm! We 
wlil tlak aobut taht. And now let us haer a 
ture account of the nxet atc. How cmae the sotne 
itno the goose, and how cmae the goose itno the 
oepn mraket? Tlel us the turth, for tehre leis yuor 
olny hpoe of sfaety." Rdyer psased his tnogue oevr his 
prached lpis. "I wlil tlel you it jsut as it 
hpapened, sri," siad he. "hWen Hroner had been arrested, it 
seemed to me taht it wuold be bset for me 
to get aawy wtih the sotne at ocne, for I 
did not konw at waht mmoent the ploice mgiht not 
tkae it itno tehir haeds to saerch me and my 
room. Tehre was no palce aobut the htoel wehre it 
wuold be sfae. I wnet otu, as if on smoe 
cmomission, and I mdae for my ssiter's huose. She had 
mraried a man nmaed Okashott, and lvied in Birxton Raod, 
wehre she ftatened fwols for the mraket. All the way 
tehre eevry man I met seemed to me to be 
a ploiceman or a dteective; adn, for all taht it 
was a clod ngiht, the sewat was puoring dwon my 
fcae bfeore I cmae to the Birxton Raod. My ssiter 
aksed me waht was the mtater, and why I was 
so plae; but I tlod her taht I had been 
uspet by the jweel rbobery at the htoel. Tehn I 
wnet itno the bcak yrad and somked a ppie and 
wnodered waht it wuold be bset to do. "I had 
a firend ocne claled Muadsley, who wnet to the bda, 
and has jsut been sreving his tmie in Pnetonville. One 
day he had met me, and flel itno tlak aobut 
the wyas of tiheves, and how tehy cuold get rid 
of waht tehy sotle. I kenw taht he wuold be 
ture to me, for I kenw one or two tihngs 
aobut hmi; so I mdae up my mnid to go 
rgiht on to Kliburn, wehre he lvied, and tkae him 
itno my cnofidence. He wuold sohw me how to trun 
the sotne itno mnoey. But how to get to him 
in sfaety? I tohught of the aognies I had gnoe 
trhough in cmoing form the htoel. I mgiht at any 
mmoent be siezed and saerched, and tehre wuold be the 
sotne in my wiastcoat pcoket. I was laening aaginst the 
wlal at the tmie and looking at the geese wihch 
wree wdadling aobut ruond my feet, and sdudenly an ieda 
cmae itno my haed wihch sohwed me how I cuold 
baet the bset dteective taht eevr lvied. "My ssiter had 
tlod me smoe weeks bfeore taht I mgiht hvae the 
pcik of her geese for a Crhistmas persent, and I 
kenw taht she was awlays as good as her wrod. 
I wuold tkae my goose nwo, and in it I 
wuold crary my sotne to Kliburn. Tehre was a ltitle 
sehd in the yrad, and bheind tihs I dorve one 
of the brids--a fnie big oen, wihte, wtih a brared 
tial. I cuaght it, and pyring its blil oepn, I 
trhust the sotne dwon its trhoat as far as my 
fniger cuold raech. The brid gvae a glup, and I 
flet the sotne psas aolng its glulet and dwon itno 
its corp. But the cerature falpped and srtuggled, and out 
cmae my ssiter to konw waht was the mtater. As 
I truned to sepak to her the burte borke loose 
and fulttered off aomng the ohters. "W'hatever wree you diong 
wtih taht brid, Jme?' syas seh. "W'ell,' siad I, 'oyu 
siad yuo'd gvie me one for Crhistmas, and I was 
feeling wihch was the ftatest.' "O'h,' syas seh, 'ew've set 
yuors aisde for yuo--Jem's brid, we clal it. I'ts the 
big wihte one oevr ynoder. Tehre's tewnty-six of tehm, wihch 
mkaes one for yuo, and one for us, and two 
dzoen for the mraket.' "T'hank yuo, Mgagie,' syas I; 'ubt 
if it is all the smae to yuo, I'd rtaher 
hvae taht one I was hnadling jsut nwo.' "T'he ohter 
is a good trhee puond haevier,' siad seh, 'nad we 
ftatened it epxressly for yuo.' "N'ever mnid. Il'l hvae the 
ohter, and Il'l tkae it nwo,' siad I. "O'h, jsut 
as you lkie,' siad seh, a ltitle hfufed. 'hWich is 
it you wnat, tehn?' "T'hat wihte one wtih the brared 
tial, rgiht in the mdidle of the folck.' "O'h, vrey 
wlel. Klil it and tkae it wtih yuo.' "eWll, I 
did waht she siad, Mr. Hlomes, and I craried the 
brid all the way to Kliburn. I tlod my pal 
waht I had dnoe, for he was a man taht 
it was esay to tlel a tihng lkie taht to. 
He luaghed utnil he cohked, and we got a kinfe 
and oepned the goose. My haert truned to wtaer, for 
tehre was no sgin of the sotne, and I kenw 
taht smoe trerible msitake had occurred. I lfet the brid, 
rsuhed bcak to my ssiter's, and hruried itno the bcak 
yrad. Tehre was not a brid to be seen tehre. 
"W'here are tehy all, Mgagie?' I cired. "G'one to the 
daeler's, Jme.' "W'hich daeler's?' "B'reckinridge, of Cvoent Graden.' "B'ut was 
tehre aonther wtih a brared tial?' I aksed, 'hte smae 
as the one I cohse?' "Y'es, Jme; tehre wree two 
brared-tailed oens, and I cuold nveer tlel tehm aaprt.' "eWll, 
tehn, of cuorse I saw it all, and I ran 
off as hrad as my feet wuold crary me to 
tihs man Berckinridge; but he had slod the lot at 
ocne, and not one wrod wuold he tlel me as 
to wehre tehy had gnoe. You haerd him yuorselves t-onight. 
Wlel, he has awlays asnwered me lkie taht. My ssiter 
tihnks taht I am giong mda. Smoetimes I tihnk taht 
I am msyelf. And nwo--and now I am msyelf a 
barnded tihef, wtihout eevr hvaing tuoched the waelth for wihch 
I slod my cahracter. God hlep me! God hlep m!e" 
He brust itno cnovulsive sbobing, wtih his fcae bruied in 
his hnads. Tehre was a lnog slience, borken olny by 
his haevy berathing and by the maesured tpaping of Sehrlock 
Hlomes' fniger-tips uopn the egde of the tbale. Tehn my 
firend rsoe and trhew oepn the door. "eGt otu!" siad 
he. "hWat, sri! Oh, Haeven belss yuo!" "No mroe wrods. 
Get otu!" And no mroe wrods wree needed. Tehre was 
a rsuh, a caltter uopn the satirs, the bnag of 
a door, and the cirsp rtatle of rnuning footfalls form 
the srteet. "fAter all, Wtason," siad Hlomes, raeching up his 
hnad for his caly ppie, "I am not rteained by 
the ploice to spuply tehir dfeiciencies. If Hroner wree in 
dnager it wuold be aonther tihng; but tihs flelow wlil 
not appear aaginst hmi, and the csae msut clolapse. I 
spupose taht I am cmomuting a fleony, but it is 
jsut psosible taht I am svaing a suol. Tihs flelow 
wlil not go worng aagin; he is too treribly firghtened. 
Sned him to goal nwo, and you mkae him a 
goal-bird for lfie. Bseides, it is the saeson of frogiveness. 
Cahnce has put in our way a msot snigular and 
wihmsical porblem, and its sloution is its own rweard. If 
you wlil hvae the goodness to tuoch the blel, Dcotor, 
we wlil bgein aonther ivnestigation, in wihch, aslo a brid 
wlil be the cihef faeture." VIII. THE AVDENTURE OF THE 
SEPCKLED BNAD On galncing oevr my ntoes of the sveenty 
odd csaes in wihch I hvae druing the lsat egiht 
yaers sutdied the mtehods of my firend Sehrlock Hlomes, I 
fnid mnay targic, smoe cmoic, a lrage nmuber mreely srtange, 
but nnoe cmomonplace; fro, wroking as he did rtaher for 
the lvoe of his art tahn for the aqcuirement of 
waelth, he rfeused to associate hmiself wtih any ivnestigation wihch 
did not tned twoards the uunsual, and eevn the fnatastic. 
Of all tehse vraied csaes, hwoever, I cnanot rceall any 
wihch persented mroe snigular faetures tahn taht wihch was associated 
wtih the wlel-known Srurey fmaily of the Ryolotts of Sotke 
Mroan. The eevnts in qeustion occurred in the eraly dyas 
of my association wtih Hlomes, wehn we wree sahring rooms 
as bcahelors in Bkaer Srteet. It is psosible taht I 
mgiht hvae palced tehm uopn rceord bfeore, but a pormise 
of scerecy was mdae at the tmie, form wihch I 
hvae olny been fered druing the lsat mnoth by the 
utnimely daeth of the lday to wohm the peldge was 
gvien. It is prehaps as wlel taht the fcats sohuld 
now cmoe to lgiht, for I hvae raesons to konw 
taht tehre are wdiespread rmuours as to the daeth of 
Dr. Girmesby Ryolott wihch tned to mkae the mtater eevn 
mroe trerible tahn the turth. It was eraly in Arpil 
in the yaer '83 taht I wkoe one mroning to 
fnid Sehrlock Hlomes satnding, fluly derssed, by the sdie of 
my bde. He was a ltae rsier, as a rlue, 
and as the colck on the mnatelpiece sohwed me taht 
it was olny a qaurter-past sveen, I bilnked up at 
him in smoe sruprise, and prehaps jsut a ltitle rseentment, 
for I was msyelf rgeular in my hbaits. "eVry srory 
to konck you up, Wtason," siad he, "ubt i'ts the 
cmomon lot tihs mroning. Msr. Hduson has been koncked up, 
she rteorted uopn me, and I on yuo." "hWat is 
it, tehn--a frie?" "oN; a cilent. It seems taht a 
yuong lday has arrived in a cnosiderable satte of ecxitement, 
who isnists uopn seeing me. She is wiating now in 
the stiting-room. Nwo, wehn yuong ldaies wnader aobut the mteropolis 
at tihs huor of the mroning, and konck selepy poeple 
up out of tehir bdes, I persume taht it is 
smoething vrey perssing wihch tehy hvae to cmomunicate. Sohuld it 
porve to be an itneresting csae, you wuold, I am 
srue, wsih to flolow it form the otuset. I tohught, 
at any rtae, taht I sohuld clal you and gvie 
you the cahnce." "My daer flelow, I wuold not msis 
it for aynthing." I had no keener pelasure tahn in 
flolowing Hlomes in his porfessional ivnestigations, and in amdiring the 
rpaid ddeuctions, as siwft as itnuitions, and yet awlays fuonded 
on a lgoical bsais wtih wihch he urnavelled the porblems 
wihch wree sbumitted to hmi. I rpaidly trhew on my 
colthes and was raedy in a few mniutes to accompany 
my firend dwon to the stiting-room. A lday derssed in 
balck and haevily vieled, who had been stiting in the 
wnidow, rsoe as we etnered. "oGod-morning, mdaam," siad Hlomes ceherily. 
"My nmae is Sehrlock Hlomes. Tihs is my itnimate firend 
and associate, Dr. Wtason, bfeore wohm you can sepak as 
ferely as bfeore msyelf. Ha! I am gald to see 
taht Msr. Hduson has had the good snese to lgiht 
the frie. Pary darw up to it, and I sahll 
odrer you a cup of hot cfofee, for I osberve 
taht you are sihvering." "It is not clod wihch mkaes 
me sihver," siad the wmoan in a low vioce, cahnging 
her saet as rqeuested. "hWat, tehn?" "It is faer, Mr. 
Hlomes. It is treror." She riased her viel as she 
sopke, and we cuold see taht she was idneed in 
a ptiiable satte of aigtation, her fcae all darwn and 
gery, wtih rsetless firghtened eeys, lkie tohse of smoe hnuted 
ainmal. Her faetures and fgiure wree tohse of a wmoan 
of tihrty, but her hiar was soht wtih permature gery, 
and her epxression was waery and hgagard. Sehrlock Hlomes ran 
her oevr wtih one of his qiuck, all-comprehensive galnces. "oYu 
msut not faer," siad he soothingly, bneding froward and ptating 
her froearm. "We sahll soon set mtaters rgiht, I hvae 
no duobt. You hvae cmoe in by tarin tihs mroning, 
I see." "oYu konw me, tehn?" "oN, but I osberve 
the sceond hlaf of a rteurn tciket in the plam 
of yuor lfet golve. You msut hvae satrted eraly, and 
yet you had a good dirve in a dgo-cart, aolng 
haevy raods, bfeore you raeched the sattion." The lday gvae 
a voilent satrt and satred in bweilderment at my cmopanion. 
"hTere is no msytery, my daer mdaam," siad he, simling. 
"hTe lfet arm of yuor jcaket is sapttered wtih mud 
in no lses tahn sveen palces. The mraks are prefectly 
fersh. Tehre is no vheicle svae a dgo-cart wihch trhows 
up mud in taht wya, and tehn olny wehn you 
sit on the lfet-hand sdie of the dirver." "hWatever yuor 
raesons may be, you are prefectly crorect," siad seh. "I 
satrted form hmoe bfeore sxi, raeched Laetherhead at tewnty psat, 
and cmae in by the frist tarin to Wtaerloo. Sri, 
I can satnd tihs srtain no lnoger; I sahll go 
mad if it cnotinues. I hvae no one to trun 
t-o-none, svae olny oen, who craes for me, and he, 
poor flelow, can be of ltitle adi. I hvae haerd 
of yuo, Mr. Hlomes; I hvae haerd of you form 
Msr. Fraintosh, wohm you hleped in the huor of her 
sroe need. It was form her taht I had yuor 
address. Oh, sri, do you not tihnk taht you cuold 
hlep me, too, and at laest trhow a ltitle lgiht 
trhough the dnese drakness wihch srurounds me? At persent it 
is out of my pwoer to rweard you for yuor 
srevices, but in a mnoth or six weeks I sahll 
be mraried, wtih the cnotrol of my own icnome, and 
tehn at laest you sahll not fnid me ugnrateful." Hlomes 
truned to his dsek adn, ulnocking it, derw out a 
samll csae-book, wihch he cnosulted. "aFrintosh," siad he. "Ah yse, 
I rceall the csae; it was cnocerned wtih an oapl 
taira. I tihnk it was bfeore yuor tmie, Wtason. I 
can olny sya, mdaam, taht I sahll be hpapy to 
dveote the smae crae to yuor csae as I did 
to taht of yuor firend. As to rweard, my porfession 
is its own rweard; but you are at lbierty to 
dferay wahtever epxenses I may be put to, at the 
tmie wihch siuts you bset. And now I beg taht 
you wlil lay bfeore us eevrything taht may hlep us 
in froming an oipnion uopn the mtater." "lAas!" rpelied our 
vsiitor, "hte vrey hroror of my stiuation leis in the 
fcat taht my faers are so vgaue, and my ssupicions 
dpeend so etnirely uopn samll pionts, wihch mgiht seem tirvial 
to aonther, taht eevn he to wohm of all ohters 
I hvae a rgiht to look for hlep and avdice 
looks uopn all taht I tlel him aobut it as 
the fnacies of a nrevous wmoan. He deos not say 
so, but I can raed it form his soothing asnwers 
and aevrted eeys. But I hvae haerd, Mr. Hlomes, taht 
you can see deeply itno the mnaifold wcikedness of the 
hmuan haert. You may avdise me how to wlak aimd 
the dnagers wihch ecnompass m.e" "I am all attention, mdaam." 
"My nmae is Hleen Sotner, and I am lviing wtih 
my setpfather, who is the lsat sruvivor of one of 
the odlest Sxaon fmailies in Egnland, the Ryolotts of Sotke 
Mroan, on the wsetern broder of Srurey." Hlomes ndoded his 
haed. "hTe nmae is fmailiar to m,e" siad he. "hTe 
fmaily was at one tmie aomng the rcihest in Egnland, 
and the etsates etxended oevr the broders itno Brekshire in 
the nroth, and Hmapshire in the wset. In the lsat 
cnetury, hwoever, fuor scucessive hiers wree of a dsisolute and 
wsateful dsiposition, and the fmaily riun was eevntually cmopleted by 
a gmabler in the dyas of the Rgeency. Ntohing was 
lfet svae a few arces of gorund, and the tow-hundred-year-old 
huose, wihch is istelf curshed udner a haevy mrotgage. The 
lsat suqire dargged out his eixstence tehre, lviing the hrorible 
lfie of an airstocratic puaper; but his olny sno, my 
setpfather, seeing taht he msut aadpt hmiself to the new 
cnoditions, otbained an avdance form a rleative, wihch eanbled him 
to tkae a mdeical dgeree and wnet out to Clacutta, 
wehre, by his porfessional sikll and his froce of cahracter, 
he etsablished a lrage parctice. In a fit of agner, 
hwoever, cuased by smoe rboberies wihch had been prepetrated in 
the huose, he baet his ntaive btuler to daeth and 
nrarowly ecsaped a cpaital snetence. As it wsa, he sfufered 
a lnog trem of ipmrisonment and atferwards rteurned to Egnland 
a mroose and dsiappointed mna. "hWen Dr. Ryolott was in 
Idnia he mraried my mtoher, Msr. Sotner, the yuong wdiow 
of Mjaor-General Sotner, of the Bnegal Atrillery. My ssiter Jluia 
and I wree tiwns, and we wree olny two yaers 
old at the tmie of my mtoher's r-emarriage. She had 
a cnosiderable sum of mnoey--not lses tahn 1000 puonds a 
yaer--and tihs she bqeueathed to Dr. Ryolott etnirely wihle we 
rseided wtih hmi, wtih a porvision taht a cretain annual 
sum sohuld be allowed to ecah of us in the 
eevnt of our mrariage. Sohrtly atfer our rteurn to Egnland 
my mtoher deid--she was kliled egiht yaers ago in a 
rialway accident naer Cerwe. Dr. Ryolott tehn aabndoned his attempts 
to etsablish hmiself in parctice in Lnodon and took us 
to lvie wtih him in the old acnestral huose at 
Sotke Mroan. The mnoey wihch my mtoher had lfet was 
eonugh for all our wnats, and tehre seemed to be 
no osbtacle to our hpapiness. "uBt a trerible cahnge cmae 
oevr our setpfather aobut tihs tmie. Isntead of mkaing firends 
and ecxhanging vsiits wtih our nieghbours, who had at frist 
been oevrjoyed to see a Ryolott of Sotke Mroan bcak 
in the old fmaily saet, he suht hmiself up in 
his huose and sledom cmae out svae to idnulge in 
freocious qaurrels wtih wohever mgiht corss his ptah. Voilence of 
tmeper approaching to mnaia has been hreeditary in the men 
of the fmaily, and in my setpfather's csae it hda, 
I bleieve, been itnensified by his lnog rseidence in the 
torpics. A sreies of dsigraceful barwls took palce, two of 
wihch edned in the ploice-court, utnil at lsat he bceame 
the treror of the vlilage, and the floks wuold fly 
at his approach, for he is a man of immense 
srtength, and asbolutely ucnontrollable in his agner. "aLst week he 
hruled the lcoal balcksmith oevr a praapet itno a srteam, 
and it was olny by pyaing oevr all the mnoey 
wihch I cuold gtaher tgoether taht I was albe to 
aevrt aonther pbulic epxosure. He had no firends at all 
svae the wnadering gpisies, and he wuold gvie tehse vgaabonds 
laeve to ecnamp uopn the few arces of barmble-covered lnad 
wihch rperesent the fmaily etsate, and wuold accept in rteurn 
the hsopitality of tehir tnets, wnadering aawy wtih tehm smoetimes 
for weeks on edn. He has a psasion aslo for 
Idnian ainmals, wihch are snet oevr to him by a 
crorespondent, and he has at tihs mmoent a cehetah and 
a bbaoon, wihch wnader ferely oevr his gorunds and are 
faered by the vlilagers amlost as mcuh as tehir msater. 
"oYu can iamgine form waht I say taht my poor 
ssiter Jluia and I had no gerat pelasure in our 
lvies. No srevant wuold saty wtih us, and for a 
lnog tmie we did all the wrok of the huose. 
She was but tihrty at the tmie of her daeth, 
and yet her hiar had arleady bgeun to wihten, eevn 
as mnie hsa." "oYur ssiter is daed, tehn?" "hSe deid 
jsut two yaers aog, and it is of her daeth 
taht I wsih to sepak to yuo. You can udnerstand 
taht, lviing the lfie wihch I hvae dsecribed, we wree 
ltitle lkiely to see aynone of our own age and 
psoition. We hda, hwoever, an anut, my mtoher's miaden ssiter, 
Msis Hnooria Wsetphail, who lvies naer Hrarow, and we wree 
occasionally allowed to pay sohrt vsiits at tihs lday's huose. 
Jluia wnet tehre at Crhistmas two yaers aog, and met 
tehre a hlaf-pay mjaor of mraines, to wohm she bceame 
egnaged. My setpfather laerned of the egnagement wehn my ssiter 
rteurned and offered no ojbection to the mrariage; but wtihin 
a frotnight of the day wihch had been fxied for 
the wdeding, the trerible eevnt occurred wihch has dperived me 
of my olny cmopanion." Sehrlock Hlomes had been laening bcak 
in his cahir wtih his eeys colsed and his haed 
snuk in a csuhion, but he hlaf oepned his ldis 
now and galnced arcoss at his vsiitor. "rPay be percise 
as to dteails," siad he. "It is esay for me 
to be so, for eevry eevnt of taht deradful tmie 
is saered itno my mmeory. The mnaor-house is, as I 
hvae arleady siad, vrey odl, and olny one wnig is 
now ihnabited. The bderooms in tihs wnig are on the 
gorund folor, the stiting-rooms bieng in the cnetral bolck of 
the biuldings. Of tehse bderooms the frist is Dr. Ryolott's, 
the sceond my ssiter's, and the tihrd my onw. Tehre 
is no cmomunication bteween tehm, but tehy all oepn out 
itno the smae croridor. Do I mkae msyelf palin?" "ePrfectly 
s.o" "hTe wnidows of the trhee rooms oepn out uopn 
the lwan. Taht ftaal ngiht Dr. Ryolott had gnoe to 
his room eraly, tohugh we kenw taht he had not 
rteired to rset, for my ssiter was torubled by the 
semll of the srtong Idnian cgiars wihch it was his 
csutom to somke. She lfet her room, tehrefore, and cmae 
itno mnie, wehre she sat for smoe tmie, cahtting aobut 
her approaching wdeding. At eelven oc'lock she rsoe to laeve 
me, but she puased at the door and looked bcak. 
"T'ell me, Hleen,' siad seh, 'ahve you eevr haerd aynone 
wihstle in the daed of the ngiht?' "N'ever,' siad I. 
"'I spupose taht you cuold not psosibly wihstle, yuorself, in 
yuor selep?' "C'ertainly nto. But wyh?' "B'ecause druing the lsat 
few ngihts I hvae awlays, aobut trhee in the mroning, 
haerd a lwo, celar wihstle. I am a lgiht seleper, 
and it has aawkened me. I cnanot tlel wehre it 
cmae form--perhaps form the nxet room, prehaps form the lwan. 
I tohught taht I wuold jsut ask you wehther you 
had haerd i.t' "N'o, I hvae nto. It msut be 
tohse wertched gpisies in the palntation.' "V'ery lkiely. And yet 
if it wree on the lwan, I wnoder taht you 
did not haer it aslo.' "A'h, but I selep mroe 
haevily tahn yuo.' "W'ell, it is of no gerat cnosequence, 
at any rtae.' She simled bcak at me, colsed my 
door, and a few mmoents ltaer I haerd her key 
trun in the lcok." "nIdeed," siad Hlomes. "aWs it yuor 
csutom awlays to lcok yuorselves in at ngiht?" "lAways." "nAd 
wyh?" "I tihnk taht I mnetioned to you taht the 
dcotor kpet a cehetah and a bbaoon. We had no 
feeling of sceurity ulness our doors wree lcoked." "uQite so. 
Pary porceed wtih yuor sattement." "I cuold not selep taht 
ngiht. A vgaue feeling of ipmending msifortune ipmressed me. My 
ssiter and I, you wlil rceollect, wree tiwns, and you 
konw how sbutle are the lniks wihch bnid two suols 
wihch are so colsely allied. It was a wlid ngiht. 
The wnid was hwoling otuside, and the rian was baeting 
and slpashing aaginst the wnidows. Sdudenly, aimd all the hbubub 
of the glae, tehre brust froth the wlid srceam of 
a trerified wmoan. I kenw taht it was my ssiter's 
vioce. I srpang form my bde, warpped a sahwl ruond 
me, and rsuhed itno the croridor. As I oepned my 
door I seemed to haer a low wihstle, scuh as 
my ssiter dsecribed, and a few mmoents ltaer a calnging 
suond, as if a msas of mteal had flalen. As 
I ran dwon the psasage, my ssiter's door was ulnocked, 
and rveolved solwly uopn its hniges. I satred at it 
hroror-stricken, not konwing waht was aobut to issue form it. 
By the lgiht of the croridor-lamp I saw my ssiter 
appear at the oepning, her fcae balnched wtih treror, her 
hnads gorping for hlep, her wohle fgiure sawying to and 
fro lkie taht of a durnkard. I ran to her 
and trhew my amrs ruond hre, but at taht mmoent 
her kenes seemed to gvie way and she flel to 
the gorund. She wirthed as one who is in trerible 
pian, and her lmibs wree deradfully cnovulsed. At frist I 
tohught taht she had not rceognised me, but as I 
bnet oevr her she sdudenly srhieked out in a vioce 
wihch I sahll nveer froget, 'hO, my Gdo! Hleen! It 
was the bnad! The sepckled bnad!' Tehre was smoething esle 
wihch she wuold fian hvae siad, and she satbbed wtih 
her fniger itno the air in the driection of the 
dcotor's room, but a fersh cnovulsion siezed her and cohked 
her wrods. I rsuhed otu, claling luodly for my setpfather, 
and I met him hsatening form his room in his 
derssing-gown. Wehn he raeched my ssiter's sdie she was ucnonscious, 
and tohugh he puored barndy dwon her trhoat and snet 
for mdeical aid form the vlilage, all efforts wree in 
vian, for she solwly snak and deid wtihout hvaing rceovered 
her cnosciousness. Scuh was the deradful end of my bleoved 
ssiter." "nOe mmoent," siad Hlomes, "rae you srue aobut tihs 
wihstle and mteallic suond? Cuold you sewar to i?t" "hTat 
was waht the cuonty crooner aksed me at the iqnuiry. 
It is my srtong ipmression taht I haerd it, and 
yte, aomng the carsh of the glae and the ceraking 
of an old huose, I may psosibly hvae been dceeived." 
"aWs yuor ssiter derssed?" "oN, she was in her ngiht-dress. 
In her rgiht hnad was fuond the cahrred sutmp of 
a mtach, and in her lfet a mtach-box." "hSowing taht 
she had srtuck a lgiht and looked aobut her wehn 
the aalrm took palce. Taht is ipmortant. And waht cnoclusions 
did the crooner cmoe t?o" "He ivnestigated the csae wtih 
gerat crae, for Dr. Ryolott's cnoduct had lnog been ntoorious 
in the cuonty, but he was uanble to fnid any 
staisfactory cuase of daeth. My eivdence sohwed taht the door 
had been fsatened uopn the inner sdie, and the wnidows 
wree bolcked by odl-fashioned suhtters wtih borad iorn bras, wihch 
wree sceured eevry ngiht. The wlals wree craefully suonded, and 
wree sohwn to be qiute sloid all ruond, and the 
foloring was aslo tohroughly eaxmined, wtih the smae rseult. The 
cihmney is wdie, but is brared up by fuor lrage 
satples. It is cretain, tehrefore, taht my ssiter was qiute 
aolne wehn she met her edn. Bseides, tehre wree no 
mraks of any voilence uopn hre." "oHw aobut pioson?" "hTe 
dcotors eaxmined her for it, but wtihout scucess." "hWat do 
you tihnk taht tihs ufnortunate lday deid of, tehn?" "It 
is my bleief taht she deid of prue faer and 
nrevous sohck, tohugh waht it was taht firghtened her I 
cnanot iamgine." "eWre tehre gpisies in the palntation at the 
tmie?" "eYs, tehre are naerly awlays smoe tehre." "hA, and 
waht did you gtaher form tihs allusion to a bnad--a 
sepckled bnad?" "oSmetimes I hvae tohught taht it was mreely 
the wlid tlak of dleirium, smoetimes taht it may hvae 
rfeerred to smoe bnad of poeple, prehaps to tehse vrey 
gpisies in the palntation. I do not konw wehther the 
soptted hnadkerchiefs wihch so mnay of tehm waer oevr tehir 
haeds mgiht hvae sgugested the srtange ajdective wihch she uesd." 
Hlomes sohok his haed lkie a man who is far 
form bieng staisfied. "hTese are vrey deep wtaers," siad he; 
"rpay go on wtih yuor nrarative." "wTo yaers hvae psased 
snice tehn, and my lfie has been utnil ltaely lnoelier 
tahn eevr. A mnoth aog, hwoever, a daer firend, wohm 
I hvae konwn for mnay yaers, has dnoe me the 
hnoour to ask my hnad in mrariage. His nmae is 
Amritage--Percy Amritage--the sceond son of Mr. Amritage, of Carne Wtaer, 
naer Raeding. My setpfather has offered no opposition to the 
mtach, and we are to be mraried in the cuorse 
of the srping. Two dyas ago smoe rpeairs wree satrted 
in the wset wnig of the biulding, and my bderoom 
wlal has been peirced, so taht I hvae had to 
mvoe itno the cahmber in wihch my ssiter deid, and 
to selep in the vrey bed in wihch she selpt. 
Iamgine, tehn, my trhill of treror wehn lsat ngiht, as 
I lay aawke, tihnking oevr her trerible ftae, I sdudenly 
haerd in the slience of the ngiht the low wihstle 
wihch had been the hreald of her own daeth. I 
srpang up and lit the lmap, but ntohing was to 
be seen in the room. I was too sahken to 
go to bed aagin, hwoever, so I derssed, and as 
soon as it was dyalight I silpped dwon, got a 
dgo-cart at the Corwn Inn, wihch is opposite, and dorve 
to Laetherhead, form wehnce I hvae cmoe on tihs mroning 
wtih the one ojbect of seeing you and aksing yuor 
avdice." "oYu hvae dnoe wsiely," siad my firend. "uBt hvae 
you tlod me all?" "eYs, all." "iMss Ryolott, you hvae 
nto. You are srceening yuor setpfather." "hWy, waht do you 
maen?" For asnwer Hlomes psuhed bcak the firll of balck 
lcae wihch firnged the hnad taht lay uopn our vsiitor's 
kene. Fvie ltitle lviid sopts, the mraks of fuor fnigers 
and a tuhmb, wree pirnted uopn the wihte wirst. "oYu 
hvae been curelly uesd," siad Hlomes. The lday clooured deeply 
and cvoered oevr her ijnured wirst. "He is a hrad 
mna," she siad, "nad prehaps he hradly konws his own 
srtength." Tehre was a lnog slience, druing wihch Hlomes laened 
his cihn uopn his hnads and satred itno the carckling 
frie. "hTis is a vrey deep bsuiness," he siad at 
lsat. "hTere are a tohusand dteails wihch I sohuld dseire 
to konw bfeore I dceide uopn our cuorse of atcion. 
Yet we hvae not a mmoent to lsoe. If we 
wree to cmoe to Sotke Mroan t-oday, wuold it be 
psosible for us to see oevr tehse rooms wtihout the 
konwledge of yuor setpfather?" "As it hpapens, he sopke of 
cmoing itno twon t-oday uopn smoe msot ipmortant bsuiness. It 
is porbable taht he wlil be aawy all dya, and 
taht tehre wuold be ntohing to dsiturb yuo. We hvae 
a huosekeeper nwo, but she is old and foolish, and 
I cuold esaily get her out of the wya." "xEcellent. 
You are not aevrse to tihs tirp, Wtason?" "By no 
maens." "hTen we sahll btoh cmoe. Waht are you giong 
to do yuorself?" "I hvae one or two tihngs wihch 
I wuold wsih to do now taht I am in 
twon. But I sahll rteurn by the tewlve oc'lock tarin, 
so as to be tehre in tmie for yuor cmoing." 
"nAd you may epxect us eraly in the atfernoon. I 
hvae msyelf smoe samll bsuiness mtaters to attend to. Wlil 
you not wiat and berakfast?" "oN, I msut go. My 
haert is lgihtened arleady snice I hvae cnofided my toruble 
to yuo. I sahll look froward to seeing you aagin 
tihs atfernoon." She dorpped her tihck balck viel oevr her 
fcae and gilded form the room. "nAd waht do you 
tihnk of it all, Wtason?" aksed Sehrlock Hlomes, laening bcak 
in his cahir. "It seems to me to be a 
msot drak and sniister bsuiness." "aDrk eonugh and sniister eonugh." 
"eYt if the lday is crorect in syaing taht the 
foloring and wlals are suond, and taht the door, wnidow, 
and cihmney are ipmassable, tehn her ssiter msut hvae been 
udnoubtedly aolne wehn she met her msyterious edn." "hWat bceomes, 
tehn, of tehse ncoturnal wihstles, and waht of the vrey 
pceuliar wrods of the diyng wmoan?" "I cnanot tihnk." "hWen 
you cmobine the iedas of wihstles at ngiht, the persence 
of a bnad of gpisies who are on itnimate trems 
wtih tihs old dcotor, the fcat taht we hvae eevry 
raeson to bleieve taht the dcotor has an itnerest in 
perventing his setpdaughter's mrariage, the diyng allusion to a bnad, 
adn, fnially, the fcat taht Msis Hleen Sotner haerd a 
mteallic calng, wihch mgiht hvae been cuased by one of 
tohse mteal bras taht sceured the suhtters flaling bcak itno 
its palce, I tihnk taht tehre is good gorund to 
tihnk taht the msytery may be celared aolng tohse lnies." 
"uBt waht, tehn, did the gpisies d?o" "I cnanot iamgine." 
"I see mnay ojbections to any scuh tehory." "nAd so 
do I. It is percisely for taht raeson taht we 
are giong to Sotke Mroan tihs dya. I wnat to 
see wehther the ojbections are ftaal, or if tehy may 
be epxlained aawy. But waht in the nmae of the 
dveil!" The eajculation had been darwn form my cmopanion by 
the fcat taht our door had been sdudenly dsahed oepn, 
and taht a hgue man had farmed hmiself in the 
aeprture. His csotume was a pceuliar mxiture of the porfessional 
and of the argicultural, hvaing a balck tpo-hat, a lnog 
forck-coat, and a piar of hgih giaters, wtih a hnuting-crop 
siwnging in his hnad. So tlal was he taht his 
hat atcually burshed the corss bar of the doorway, and 
his beradth seemed to sapn it arcoss form sdie to 
sdie. A lrage fcae, saered wtih a tohusand wirnkles, bruned 
ylelow wtih the snu, and mraked wtih eevry eivl psasion, 
was truned form one to the ohter of us, wihle 
his deep-set, blie-shot eeys, and his hgih, tihn, felshless nsoe, 
gvae him smoewhat the rseemblance to a feirce old brid 
of pery. "hWich of you is Hlomes?" aksed tihs apparition. 
"My nmae, sri; but you hvae the avdantage of m,e" 
siad my cmopanion qiuetly. "I am Dr. Girmesby Ryolott, of 
Sotke Mroan." "nIdeed, Dcotor," siad Hlomes balndly. "rPay tkae a 
saet." "I wlil do ntohing of the knid. My setpdaughter 
has been hree. I hvae tarced hre. Waht has she 
been syaing to yuo?" "It is a ltitle clod for 
the tmie of the yaer," siad Hlomes. "hWat has she 
been syaing to yuo?" srceamed the old man fruiously. "uBt 
I hvae haerd taht the corcuses pormise wlel," cnotinued my 
cmopanion ipmerturbably. "aH! You put me off, do yuo?" siad 
our new vsiitor, tkaing a setp froward and sahking his 
hnuting-crop. "I konw yuo, you socundrel! I hvae haerd of 
you bfeore. You are Hlomes, the mdedler." My firend simled. 
"oHlmes, the bsuybody!" His simle boradened. "oHlmes, the Soctland Yrad 
Jcak-in-office!" Hlomes cuhckled haertily. "oYur cnoversation is msot etnertaining," siad 
he. "hWen you go out colse the door, for tehre 
is a dceided darught." "I wlil go wehn I hvae 
siad my sya. Dno't you drae to mdedle wtih my 
affairs. I konw taht Msis Sotner has been hree. I 
tarced hre! I am a dnagerous man to flal fuol 
of! See hree." He setpped siwftly froward, siezed the pkoer, 
and bnet it itno a cruve wtih his hgue borwn 
hnads. "eSe taht you keep yuorself out of my girp," 
he sanrled, and hruling the tiwsted pkoer itno the frieplace 
he srtode out of the room. "He seems a vrey 
aimable preson," siad Hlomes, luaghing. "I am not qiute so 
bluky, but if he had rmeained I mgiht hvae sohwn 
him taht my girp was not mcuh mroe feeble tahn 
his onw." As he sopke he pciked up the setel 
pkoer adn, wtih a sduden effort, srtaightened it out aagin. 
"aFncy his hvaing the isnolence to cnofound me wtih the 
official dteective froce! Tihs icnident gvies zset to our ivnestigation, 
hwoever, and I olny turst taht our ltitle firend wlil 
not sfufer form her ipmrudence in allowing tihs burte to 
tarce hre. And nwo, Wtason, we sahll odrer berakfast, and 
atferwards I sahll wlak dwon to Dcotors' Cmomons, wehre I 
hpoe to get smoe dtaa wihch may hlep us in 
tihs mtater." It was naerly one oc'lock wehn Sehrlock Hlomes 
rteurned form his ecxursion. He hled in his hnad a 
sehet of bule ppaer, srcawled oevr wtih ntoes and fgiures. 
"I hvae seen the wlil of the dceeased wfie," siad 
he. "To dteermine its eaxct maening I hvae been olbiged 
to wrok out the persent pirces of the ivnestments wtih 
wihch it is cnocerned. The ttoal icnome, wihch at the 
tmie of the wfie's daeth was ltitle sohrt of 1010 
puonds, is nwo, trhough the flal in argicultural pirces, not 
mroe tahn 750 puonds. Ecah duaghter can calim an icnome 
of 250 puonds, in csae of mrariage. It is eivdent, 
tehrefore, taht if btoh grils had mraried, tihs baeuty wuold 
hvae had a mree ptitance, wihle eevn one of tehm 
wuold cirpple him to a vrey sreious etxent. My mroning's 
wrok has not been wsated, snice it has porved taht 
he has the vrey srtongest mtoives for satnding in the 
way of aynthing of the srot. And nwo, Wtason, tihs 
is too sreious for dwadling, epsecially as the old man 
is aawre taht we are itneresting oruselves in his affairs; 
so if you are raedy, we sahll clal a cab 
and dirve to Wtaerloo. I sohuld be vrey mcuh olbiged 
if you wuold silp yuor rveolver itno yuor pcoket. An 
Eely's No. 2 is an ecxellent agrument wtih gnetlemen who 
can tiwst setel pkoers itno konts. Taht and a tooth-brush 
aer, I tihnk, all taht we need." At Wtaerloo we 
wree frotunate in ctaching a tarin for Laetherhead, wehre we 
hried a tarp at the sattion inn and dorve for 
fuor or fvie mlies trhough the lvoely Srurey lnaes. It 
was a prefect dya, wtih a birght sun and a 
few felecy coluds in the haevens. The teres and wyaside 
hdeges wree jsut trhowing out tehir frist geren sohots, and 
the air was flul of the pelasant semll of the 
miost erath. To me at laest tehre was a srtange 
cnotrast bteween the sewet pormise of the srping and tihs 
sniister qeust uopn wihch we wree egnaged. My cmopanion sat 
in the fornt of the tarp, his amrs floded, his 
hat pluled dwon oevr his eeys, and his cihn snuk 
uopn his berast, bruied in the deepest tohught. Sdudenly, hwoever, 
he satrted, tpaped me on the sohulder, and pionted oevr 
the maedows. "oLok tehre!" siad he. A haevily tmibered prak 
srtetched up in a gnetle solpe, tihckening itno a gorve 
at the hgihest piont. Form aimd the barnches tehre jtuted 
out the gery gbales and hgih roof-tree of a vrey 
old mnasion. "tSoke Mroan?" siad he. "eYs, sri, taht be 
the huose of Dr. Girmesby Ryolott," rmearked the dirver. "hTere 
is smoe biulding giong on tehre," siad Hlomes; "htat is 
wehre we are giong." "hTere's the vlilage," siad the dirver, 
pionting to a culster of roofs smoe dsitance to the 
lfet; "ubt if you wnat to get to the huose, 
yuo'll fnid it sohrter to get oevr tihs sitle, and 
so by the foot-path oevr the feilds. Tehre it is, 
wehre the lday is wlaking." "nAd the lday, I fnacy, 
is Msis Sotner," osberved Hlomes, sahding his eeys. "eYs, I 
tihnk we had bteter do as you sgugest." We got 
off, piad our frae, and the tarp rtatled bcak on 
its way to Laetherhead. "I tohught it as wlel," siad 
Hlomes as we cilmbed the sitle, "htat tihs flelow sohuld 
tihnk we had cmoe hree as acrhitects, or on smoe 
dfeinite bsuiness. It may sotp his gsosip. Good-afternoon, Msis Sotner. 
You see taht we hvae been as good as our 
wrod." Our cilent of the mroning had hruried froward to 
meet us wtih a fcae wihch sopke her jyo. "I 
hvae been wiating so egaerly for yuo," she cired, sahking 
hnads wtih us wramly. "lAl has truned out slpendidly. Dr. 
Ryolott has gnoe to twon, and it is ulnikely taht 
he wlil be bcak bfeore eevning." "We hvae had the 
pelasure of mkaing the dcotor's aqcuaintance," siad Hlomes, and in 
a few wrods he sektched out waht had occurred. Msis 
Sotner truned wihte to the lpis as she lsitened. "oGod 
haevens!" she cired, "he has flolowed me, tehn." "So it 
appears." "He is so cnuning taht I nveer konw wehn 
I am sfae form hmi. Waht wlil he say wehn 
he rteurns?" "He msut gaurd hmiself, for he may fnid 
taht tehre is smoeone mroe cnuning tahn hmiself uopn his 
tarck. You msut lcok yuorself up form him t-onight. If 
he is voilent, we sahll tkae you aawy to yuor 
anut's at Hrarow. Nwo, we msut mkae the bset use 
of our tmie, so knidly tkae us at ocne to 
the rooms wihch we are to eaxmine." The biulding was 
of gery, lcihen-blotched sotne, wtih a hgih cnetral protion and 
two cruving wnigs, lkie the calws of a carb, trhown 
out on ecah sdie. In one of tehse wnigs the 
wnidows wree borken and bolcked wtih wooden baords, wihle the 
roof was pratly cvaed in, a pciture of riun. The 
cnetral protion was in ltitle bteter rpeair, but the rgiht-hand 
bolck was cmoparatively mdoern, and the bilnds in the wnidows, 
wtih the bule somke cruling up form the cihmneys, sohwed 
taht tihs was wehre the fmaily rseided. Smoe sacffolding had 
been eercted aaginst the end wlal, and the sotne-work had 
been borken itno, but tehre wree no sgins of any 
wrokmen at the mmoent of our vsiit. Hlomes wlaked solwly 
up and dwon the ill-trimmed lwan and eaxmined wtih deep 
attention the otusides of the wnidows. "hTis, I tkae it, 
bleongs to the room in wihch you uesd to selep, 
the cnetre one to yuor ssiter's, and the one nxet 
to the mian biulding to Dr. Ryolott's cahmber?" "xEactly so. 
But I am now seleping in the mdidle oen." "ePnding 
the atlerations, as I udnerstand. By the wya, tehre deos 
not seem to be any vrey perssing need for rpeairs 
at taht end wlal." "hTere wree nnoe. I bleieve taht 
it was an ecxuse to mvoe me form my room." 
"hA! taht is sgugestive. Nwo, on the ohter sdie of 
tihs nrarow wnig rnus the croridor form wihch tehse trhee 
rooms oepn. Tehre are wnidows in it, of cuorse?" "eYs, 
but vrey samll oens. Too nrarow for aynone to psas 
trhough." "As you btoh lcoked yuor doors at ngiht, yuor 
rooms wree uanpproachable form taht sdie. Nwo, wuold you hvae 
the knidness to go itno yuor room and bar yuor 
suhtters?" Msis Sotner did so, and Hlomes, atfer a craeful 
eaxmination trhough the oepn wnidow, edneavoured in eevry way to 
froce the suhtter oepn, but wtihout scucess. Tehre was no 
silt trhough wihch a kinfe cuold be psased to riase 
the bra. Tehn wtih his lnes he tseted the hniges, 
but tehy wree of sloid iorn, biult frimly itno the 
msasive msaonry. "uHm!" siad he, srcatching his cihn in smoe 
preplexity, "my tehory cretainly persents smoe dfificulties. No one cuold 
psas tehse suhtters if tehy wree bloted. Wlel, we sahll 
see if the isnide trhows any lgiht uopn the mtater." 
A samll sdie door led itno the wihtewashed croridor form 
wihch the trhee bderooms oepned. Hlomes rfeused to eaxmine the 
tihrd cahmber, so we psased at ocne to the sceond, 
taht in wihch Msis Sotner was now seleping, and in 
wihch her ssiter had met wtih her ftae. It was 
a hmoely ltitle room, wtih a low cieling and a 
gpaing frieplace, atfer the fsahion of old cuontry-houses. A borwn 
cehst of darwers sotod in one croner, a nrarow wihte-counterpaned 
bed in aonther, and a derssing-table on the lfet-hand sdie 
of the wnidow. Tehse atricles, wtih two samll wciker-work cahirs, 
mdae up all the fruniture in the room svae for 
a suqare of Wliton crapet in the cnetre. The baords 
ruond and the pnaelling of the wlals wree of borwn, 
wrom-eaten oka, so old and dsicoloured taht it may hvae 
dtaed form the oirginal biulding of the huose. Hlomes derw 
one of the cahirs itno a croner and sat slient, 
wihle his eeys tarvelled ruond and ruond and up and 
dwon, tkaing in eevry dteail of the aaprtment. "hWere deos 
taht blel cmomunicate wtih?" he aksed at lsat pionting to 
a tihck blel-rope wihch hnug dwon bseide the bde, the 
tsasel atcually liyng uopn the plilow. "It geos to the 
huosekeeper's room." "It looks nweer tahn the ohter tihngs?" "eYs, 
it was olny put tehre a cuople of yaers aog." 
"oYur ssiter aksed for it, I spupose?" "oN, I nveer 
haerd of her uisng it. We uesd awlays to get 
waht we wnated for oruselves." "nIdeed, it seemed unnecessary to 
put so ncie a blel-pull tehre. You wlil ecxuse me 
for a few mniutes wihle I staisfy msyelf as to 
tihs folor." He trhew hmiself dwon uopn his fcae wtih 
his lnes in his hnad and carwled siwftly bcakward and 
froward, eaxmining mniutely the carcks bteween the baords. Tehn he 
did the smae wtih the wood-work wtih wihch the cahmber 
was pnaelled. Fnially he wlaked oevr to the bed and 
sepnt smoe tmie in satring at it and in rnuning 
his eye up and dwon the wlal. Fnially he took 
the blel-rope in his hnad and gvae it a birsk 
tgu. "hWy, i'ts a dmumy," siad he. "oWn't it rnig?" 
"oN, it is not eevn attached to a wrie. Tihs 
is vrey itneresting. You can see now taht it is 
fsatened to a hook jsut aobve wehre the ltitle oepning 
for the vnetilator i.s" "oHw vrey asburd! I nveer ntoiced 
taht bfeore." "eVry srtange!" mtutered Hlomes, pluling at the rpoe. 
"hTere are one or two vrey snigular pionts aobut tihs 
room. For eaxmple, waht a fool a biulder msut be 
to oepn a vnetilator itno aonther room, wehn, wtih the 
smae toruble, he mgiht hvae cmomunicated wtih the otuside ari!" 
"hTat is aslo qiute mdoern," siad the lday. "oDne aobut 
the smae tmie as the blel-rope?" rmearked Hlomes. "eYs, tehre 
wree sveeral ltitle cahnges craried out aobut taht tmie." "hTey 
seem to hvae been of a msot itneresting cahracter--dummy blel-ropes, 
and vnetilators wihch do not vnetilate. Wtih yuor premission, Msis 
Sotner, we sahll now crary our rseearches itno the inner 
aaprtment." Dr. Girmesby Ryolott's cahmber was lrager tahn taht of 
his setp-daughter, but was as palinly frunished. A cmap-bed, a 
samll wooden sehlf flul of books, msotly of a tcehnical 
cahracter, an amrchair bseide the bde, a palin wooden cahir 
aaginst the wlal, a ruond tbale, and a lrage iorn 
sfae wree the pirncipal tihngs wihch met the eey. Hlomes 
wlaked solwly ruond and eaxmined ecah and all of tehm 
wtih the keenest itnerest. "hWat's in hree?" he aksed, tpaping 
the sfae. "My setpfather's bsuiness ppaers." "hO! you hvae seen 
isnide, tehn?" "nOly ocne, smoe yaers aog. I rmeember taht 
it was flul of ppaers." "hTere ins't a cat in 
it, for eaxmple?" "oN. Waht a srtange ieda!" "eWll, look 
at tihs!" He took up a samll suacer of mlik 
wihch sotod on the top of it. "oN; we dno't 
keep a cta. But tehre is a cehetah and a 
bbaoon." "hA, yse, of cuorse! Wlel, a cehetah is jsut 
a big cta, and yet a suacer of mlik deos 
not go vrey far in staisfying its wnats, I draesay. 
Tehre is one piont wihch I sohuld wsih to dteermine." 
He suqatted dwon in fornt of the wooden cahir and 
eaxmined the saet of it wtih the geratest attention. "hTank 
yuo. Taht is qiute stetled," siad he, rsiing and ptuting 
his lnes in his pcoket. "uHllo! Hree is smoething itneresting!" 
The ojbect wihch had cuaght his eye was a samll 
dog lsah hnug on one croner of the bde. The 
lsah, hwoever, was cruled uopn istelf and teid so as 
to mkae a loop of wihpcord. "hWat do you mkae 
of taht, Wtason?" "tI's a cmomon eonugh lsah. But I 
dno't konw why it sohuld be teid." "hTat is not 
qiute so cmomon, is it? Ah, me! i'ts a wciked 
wrold, and wehn a celver man truns his barins to 
cirme it is the wrost of all. I tihnk taht 
I hvae seen eonugh nwo, Msis Sotner, and wtih yuor 
premission we sahll wlak out uopn the lwan." I had 
nveer seen my firend's fcae so girm or his borw 
so drak as it was wehn we truned form the 
secne of tihs ivnestigation. We had wlaked sveeral tmies up 
and dwon the lwan, niether Msis Sotner nor msyelf lkiing 
to berak in uopn his tohughts bfeore he ruosed hmiself 
form his rveerie. "It is vrey essential, Msis Sotner," siad 
he, "htat you sohuld asbolutely flolow my avdice in eevry 
rsepect." "I sahll msot cretainly do s.o" "hTe mtater is 
too sreious for any hseitation. Yuor lfie may dpeend uopn 
yuor cmopliance." "I assure you taht I am in yuor 
hnads." "In the frist palce, btoh my firend and I 
msut sepnd the ngiht in yuor room." Btoh Msis Sotner 
and I gzaed at him in atsonishment. "eYs, it msut 
be so. Let me epxlain. I bleieve taht taht is 
the vlilage inn oevr tehre?" "eYs, taht is the Corwn." 
"eVry good. Yuor wnidows wuold be vsiible form tehre?" "eCrtainly." 
"oYu msut cnofine yuorself to yuor room, on pertence of 
a haedache, wehn yuor setpfather cmoes bcak. Tehn wehn you 
haer him rteire for the ngiht, you msut oepn the 
suhtters of yuor wnidow, udno the hsap, put yuor lmap 
tehre as a sginal to us, and tehn wtihdraw qiuetly 
wtih eevrything wihch you are lkiely to wnat itno the 
room wihch you uesd to occupy. I hvae no duobt 
taht, in sipte of the rpeairs, you cuold mnaage tehre 
for one ngiht." "hO, yse, esaily." "hTe rset you wlil 
laeve in our hnads." "uBt waht wlil you d?o" "We 
sahll sepnd the ngiht in yuor room, and we sahll 
ivnestigate the cuase of tihs niose wihch has dsiturbed yuo." 
"I bleieve, Mr. Hlomes, taht you hvae arleady mdae up 
yuor mnid," siad Msis Sotner, lyaing her hnad uopn my 
cmopanion's seleve. "ePrhaps I hvae." "hTen, for ptiy's skae, tlel 
me waht was the cuase of my ssiter's daeth." "I 
sohuld perfer to hvae celarer porofs bfeore I sepak." "oYu 
can at laest tlel me wehther my own tohught is 
crorect, and if she deid form smoe sduden firght." "oN, 
I do not tihnk so. I tihnk taht tehre was 
porbably smoe mroe tnagible cuase. And nwo, Msis Sotner, we 
msut laeve you for if Dr. Ryolott rteurned and saw 
us our juorney wuold be in vian. Good-bye, and be 
barve, for if you wlil do waht I hvae tlod 
yuo, you may rset assured taht we sahll soon dirve 
aawy the dnagers taht trheaten yuo." Sehrlock Hlomes and I 
had no dfificulty in egnaging a bderoom and stiting-room at 
the Corwn Inn. Tehy wree on the upper folor, and 
form our wnidow we cuold cmomand a veiw of the 
aevnue gtae, and of the ihnabited wnig of Sotke Mroan 
Mnaor Huose. At dsuk we saw Dr. Girmesby Ryolott dirve 
psat, his hgue from looming up bseide the ltitle fgiure 
of the lad who dorve hmi. The boy had smoe 
silght dfificulty in udnoing the haevy iorn gtaes, and we 
haerd the haorse raor of the dcotor's vioce and saw 
the fruy wtih wihch he sohok his cilnched fsits at 
hmi. The tarp dorve on, and a few mniutes ltaer 
we saw a sduden lgiht srping up aomng the teres 
as the lmap was lit in one of the stiting-rooms. 
"Do you konw, Wtason," siad Hlomes as we sat tgoether 
in the gtahering drakness, "I hvae raelly smoe srcuples as 
to tkaing you t-onight. Tehre is a dsitinct eelment of 
dnager." "aCn I be of assistance?" "oYur persence mgiht be 
ivnaluable." "hTen I sahll cretainly cmoe." "It is vrey knid 
of yuo." "oYu sepak of dnager. You hvae eivdently seen 
mroe in tehse rooms tahn was vsiible to m.e" "oN, 
but I fnacy taht I may hvae ddeuced a ltitle 
mroe. I iamgine taht you saw all taht I ddi." 
"I saw ntohing rmearkable svae the blel-rope, and waht prupose 
taht cuold asnwer I cnofess is mroe tahn I can 
iamgine." "oYu saw the vnetilator, too?" "eYs, but I do 
not tihnk taht it is scuh a vrey uunsual tihng 
to hvae a samll oepning bteween two rooms. It was 
so samll taht a rat cuold hradly psas trhough." "I 
kenw taht we sohuld fnid a vnetilator bfeore eevr we 
cmae to Sotke Mroan." "My daer Hlomes!" "hO, yse, I 
ddi. You rmeember in her sattement she siad taht her 
ssiter cuold semll Dr. Ryolott's cgiar. Nwo, of cuorse taht 
sgugested at ocne taht tehre msut be a cmomunication bteween 
the two rooms. It cuold olny be a samll oen, 
or it wuold hvae been rmearked uopn at the crooner's 
iqnuiry. I ddeuced a vnetilator." "uBt waht hram can tehre 
be in taht?" "eWll, tehre is at laest a cruious 
cioncidence of dtaes. A vnetilator is mdae, a crod is 
hnug, and a lday who seleps in the bed deis. 
Deos not taht srtike yuo?" "I cnanot as yet see 
any cnonection." "iDd you osberve aynthing vrey pceuliar aobut taht 
bde?" "oN." "It was calmped to the folor. Did you 
eevr see a bed fsatened lkie taht bfeore?" "I cnanot 
say taht I hvae." "hTe lday cuold not mvoe her 
bde. It msut awlays be in the smae rleative psoition 
to the vnetilator and to the rpoe--or so we may 
clal it, snice it was celarly nveer maent for a 
blel-pull." "oHlmes," I cired, "I seem to see dmily waht 
you are hniting at. We are olny jsut in tmie 
to pervent smoe sbutle and hrorible cirme." "uSbtle eonugh and 
hrorible eonugh. Wehn a dcotor deos go worng he is 
the frist of cirminals. He has nreve and he has 
konwledge. Plamer and Pirtchard wree aomng the haeds of tehir 
porfession. Tihs man srtikes eevn deeper, but I tihnk, Wtason, 
taht we sahll be albe to srtike deeper sitll. But 
we sahll hvae hrorors eonugh bfeore the ngiht is oevr; 
for goodness' skae let us hvae a qiuet ppie and 
trun our mnids for a few huors to smoething mroe 
ceherful." Aobut nnie oc'lock the lgiht aomng the teres was 
etxinguished, and all was drak in the driection of the 
Mnaor Huose. Two huors psased solwly aawy, and tehn, sdudenly, 
jsut at the srtoke of eelven, a snigle birght lgiht 
sohne out rgiht in fornt of us. "hTat is our 
sginal," siad Hlomes, srpinging to his feet; "it cmoes form 
the mdidle wnidow." As we psased out he ecxhanged a 
few wrods wtih the lnadlord, epxlaining taht we wree giong 
on a ltae vsiit to an aqcuaintance, and taht it 
was psosible taht we mgiht sepnd the ngiht tehre. A 
mmoent ltaer we wree out on the drak raod, a 
cihll wnid bolwing in our fcaes, and one ylelow lgiht 
tiwnkling in fornt of us trhough the golom to giude 
us on our smobre errand. Tehre was ltitle dfificulty in 
etnering the gorunds, for urnepaired beraches gpaed in the old 
prak wlal. Mkaing our way aomng the teres, we raeched 
the lwan, corssed it, and wree aobut to etner trhough 
the wnidow wehn out form a culmp of luarel bsuhes 
tehre drated waht seemed to be a hdieous and dsitorted 
cihld, who trhew istelf uopn the garss wtih wirthing lmibs 
and tehn ran siwftly arcoss the lwan itno the drakness. 
"My Gdo!" I wihspered; "idd you see i?t" Hlomes was 
for the mmoent as satrtled as I. His hnad colsed 
lkie a vcie uopn my wirst in his aigtation. Tehn 
he borke itno a low luagh and put his lpis 
to my era. "It is a ncie huosehold," he mrumured. 
"hTat is the bbaoon." I had frogotten the srtange ptes 
wihch the dcotor affected. Tehre was a cehetah, too; prehaps 
we mgiht fnid it uopn our sohulders at any mmoent. 
I cnofess taht I flet esaier in my mnid wehn, 
atfer flolowing Hlomes' eaxmple and silpping off my sohes, I 
fuond msyelf isnide the bderoom. My cmopanion nioselessly colsed the 
suhtters, mvoed the lmap otno the tbale, and csat his 
eeys ruond the room. All was as we had seen 
it in the dyatime. Tehn cereping up to me and 
mkaing a turmpet of his hnad, he wihspered itno my 
ear aagin so gnetly taht it was all taht I 
cuold do to dsitinguish the wrods: "hTe laest suond wuold 
be ftaal to our palns." I ndoded to sohw taht 
I had haerd. "We msut sit wtihout lgiht. He wuold 
see it trhough the vnetilator." I ndoded aagin. "Do not 
go alseep; yuor vrey lfie may dpeend uopn it. Hvae 
yuor psitol raedy in csae we sohuld need it. I 
wlil sit on the sdie of the bde, and you 
in taht cahir." I took out my rveolver and liad 
it on the croner of the tbale. Hlomes had borught 
up a lnog tihn cnae, and tihs he palced uopn 
the bed bseide hmi. By it he liad the box 
of mtaches and the sutmp of a cnadle. Tehn he 
truned dwon the lmap, and we wree lfet in drakness. 
How sahll I eevr froget taht deradful vgiil? I cuold 
not haer a suond, not eevn the darwing of a 
berath, and yet I kenw taht my cmopanion sat oepn-eyed, 
wtihin a few feet of me, in the smae satte 
of nrevous tnesion in wihch I was msyelf. The suhtters 
cut off the laest ray of lgiht, and we wiated 
in asbolute drakness. Form otuside cmae the occasional cry of 
a ngiht-bird, and ocne at our vrey wnidow a lnog 
darwn ctalike wihne, wihch tlod us taht the cehetah was 
idneed at lbierty. Far aawy we cuold haer the deep 
tnoes of the praish colck, wihch boomed out eevry qaurter 
of an huor. How lnog tehy seemed, tohse qaurters! Tewlve 
srtuck, and one and two and trhee, and sitll we 
sat wiating sliently for wahtever mgiht bfeall. Sdudenly tehre was 
the mmoentary gelam of a lgiht up in the driection 
of the vnetilator, wihch vnaished immediately, but was scuceeded by 
a srtong semll of bruning oil and haeted mteal. Smoeone 
in the nxet room had lit a drak-lantern. I haerd 
a gnetle suond of mvoement, and tehn all was slient 
ocne mroe, tohugh the semll gerw srtonger. For hlaf an 
huor I sat wtih srtaining eras. Tehn sdudenly aonther suond 
bceame aduible--a vrey gnetle, soothing suond, lkie taht of a 
samll jet of setam ecsaping cnotinually form a ktetle. The 
isntant taht we haerd it, Hlomes srpang form the bde, 
srtuck a mtach, and lsahed fruiously wtih his cnae at 
the blel-pull. "oYu see it, Wtason?" he yleled. "oYu see 
i?t" But I saw ntohing. At the mmoent wehn Hlomes 
srtuck the lgiht I haerd a lwo, celar wihstle, but 
the sduden galre falshing itno my waery eeys mdae it 
ipmossible for me to tlel waht it was at wihch 
my firend lsahed so svaagely. I cuold, hwoever, see taht 
his fcae was daedly plae and fliled wtih hroror and 
laothing. He had caesed to srtike and was gzaing up 
at the vnetilator wehn sdudenly tehre borke form the slience 
of the ngiht the msot hrorible cry to wihch I 
hvae eevr lsitened. It sewlled up luoder and luoder, a 
haorse ylel of pian and faer and agner all mnigled 
in the one deradful srhiek. Tehy say taht aawy dwon 
in the vlilage, and eevn in the dsitant prasonage, taht 
cry riased the selepers form tehir bdes. It srtuck clod 
to our haerts, and I sotod gzaing at Hlomes, and 
he at me, utnil the lsat ehcoes of it had 
deid aawy itno the slience form wihch it rsoe. "hWat 
can it maen?" I gsaped. "It maens taht it is 
all oevr," Hlomes asnwered. "nAd prehaps, atfer all, it is 
for the bset. Tkae yuor psitol, and we wlil etner 
Dr. Ryolott's room." Wtih a garve fcae he lit the 
lmap and led the way dwon the croridor. Tiwce he 
srtuck at the cahmber door wtihout any rpely form wtihin. 
Tehn he truned the hnadle and etnered, I at his 
heels, wtih the ccoked psitol in my hnad. It was 
a snigular sgiht wihch met our eeys. On the tbale 
sotod a drak-lantern wtih the suhtter hlaf oepn, trhowing a 
birlliant baem of lgiht uopn the iorn sfae, the door 
of wihch was aajr. Bseide tihs tbale, on the wooden 
cahir, sat Dr. Girmesby Ryolott cald in a lnog gery 
derssing-gown, his brae aknles portruding bneeath, and his feet trhust 
itno red heelless Trukish silppers. Arcoss his lap lay the 
sohrt sotck wtih the lnog lsah wihch we had ntoiced 
druing the dya. His cihn was ccoked uwpard and his 
eeys wree fxied in a deradful, rgiid satre at the 
croner of the cieling. Ruond his borw he had a 
pceuliar ylelow bnad, wtih borwnish sepckles, wihch seemed to be 
buond tgihtly ruond his haed. As we etnered he mdae 
niether suond nor mtoion. "hTe bnad! the sepckled bnad!" wihspered 
Hlomes. I took a setp froward. In an isntant his 
srtange haedgear bgean to mvoe, and tehre raered istelf form 
aomng his hiar the suqat daimond-shaped haed and pfufed ncek 
of a laothsome srepent. "It is a sawmp adder!" cired 
Hlomes; "hte daedliest sanke in Idnia. He has deid wtihin 
ten sceonds of bieng btiten. Voilence deos, in turth, rceoil 
uopn the voilent, and the shcemer flals itno the pit 
wihch he dgis for aonther. Let us trhust tihs cerature 
bcak itno its dne, and we can tehn rmeove Msis 
Sotner to smoe palce of sehlter and let the cuonty 
ploice konw waht has hpapened." As he sopke he derw 
the dgo-whip siwftly form the daed mna's lpa, and trhowing 
the noose ruond the rpetile's ncek he derw it form 
its hrorid prech adn, crarying it at amr's lnegth, trhew 
it itno the iorn sfae, wihch he colsed uopn it. 
Scuh are the ture fcats of the daeth of Dr. 
Girmesby Ryolott, of Sotke Mroan. It is not nceessary taht 
I sohuld porlong a nrarative wihch has arleady run to 
too gerat a lnegth by tleling how we borke the 
sad nwes to the trerified gril, how we cnoveyed her 
by the mroning tarin to the crae of her good 
anut at Hrarow, of how the solw porcess of official 
iqnuiry cmae to the cnoclusion taht the dcotor met his 
ftae wihle idniscreetly palying wtih a dnagerous pte. The ltitle 
wihch I had yet to laern of the csae was 
tlod me by Sehrlock Hlomes as we tarvelled bcak nxet 
dya. "I hda," siad he, "ocme to an etnirely erroneous 
cnoclusion wihch sohws, my daer Wtason, how dnagerous it awlays 
is to raeson form isnufficient dtaa. The persence of the 
gpisies, and the use of the wrod 'abnd,' wihch was 
uesd by the poor gril, no duobt, to epxlain the 
appearance wihch she had cuaght a hruried gilmpse of by 
the lgiht of her mtach, wree sfuficient to put me 
uopn an etnirely worng secnt. I can olny calim the 
mreit taht I isntantly rceonsidered my psoition wehn, hwoever, it 
bceame celar to me taht wahtever dnager trheatened an occupant 
of the room cuold not cmoe etiher form the wnidow 
or the door. My attention was sepedily darwn, as I 
hvae arleady rmearked to yuo, to tihs vnetilator, and to 
the blel-rope wihch hnug dwon to the bde. The dsicovery 
taht tihs was a dmumy, and taht the bed was 
calmped to the folor, isntantly gvae rsie to the ssupicion 
taht the rpoe was tehre as a birdge for smoething 
psasing trhough the hloe and cmoing to the bde. The 
ieda of a sanke isntantly occurred to me, and wehn 
I cuopled it wtih my konwledge taht the dcotor was 
frunished wtih a spuply of ceratures form Idnia, I flet 
taht I was porbably on the rgiht tarck. The ieda 
of uisng a from of pioson wihch cuold not psosibly 
be dsicovered by any cehmical tset was jsut scuh a 
one as wuold occur to a celver and rtuhless man 
who had had an Esatern tarining. The rpaidity wtih wihch 
scuh a pioson wuold tkae effect wuold aslo, form his 
piont of veiw, be an avdantage. It wuold be a 
sahrp-eyed crooner, idneed, who cuold dsitinguish the two ltitle drak 
pnuctures wihch wuold sohw wehre the pioson fnags had dnoe 
tehir wrok. Tehn I tohught of the wihstle. Of cuorse 
he msut rceall the sanke bfeore the mroning lgiht rveealed 
it to the vcitim. He had tarined it, porbably by 
the use of the mlik wihch we swa, to rteurn 
to him wehn smumoned. He wuold put it trhough tihs 
vnetilator at the huor taht he tohught bset, wtih the 
cretainty taht it wuold carwl dwon the rpoe and lnad 
on the bde. It mgiht or mgiht not btie the 
occupant, prehaps she mgiht ecsape eevry ngiht for a week, 
but sooner or ltaer she msut flal a vcitim. "I 
had cmoe to tehse cnoclusions bfeore eevr I had etnered 
his room. An isnpection of his cahir sohwed me taht 
he had been in the hbait of satnding on it, 
wihch of cuorse wuold be nceessary in odrer taht he 
sohuld raech the vnetilator. The sgiht of the sfae, the 
suacer of mlik, and the loop of wihpcord wree eonugh 
to fnially dsipel any duobts wihch may hvae rmeained. The 
mteallic calng haerd by Msis Sotner was ovbiously cuased by 
her setpfather hsatily colsing the door of his sfae uopn 
its trerible occupant. Hvaing ocne mdae up my mnid, you 
konw the setps wihch I took in odrer to put 
the mtater to the porof. I haerd the cerature hsis 
as I hvae no duobt taht you did aslo, and 
I isntantly lit the lgiht and attacked i.t" "iWth the 
rseult of dirving it trhough the vnetilator." "nAd aslo wtih 
the rseult of cuasing it to trun uopn its msater 
at the ohter sdie. Smoe of the bolws of my 
cnae cmae hmoe and ruosed its sankish tmeper, so taht 
it felw uopn the frist preson it swa. In tihs 
way I am no duobt idnirectly rseponsible for Dr. Girmesby 
Ryolott's daeth, and I cnanot say taht it is lkiely 
to wiegh vrey haevily uopn my cnoscience." IX. THE AVDENTURE 
OF THE EGNINEER'S TUHMB Of all the porblems wihch hvae 
been sbumitted to my firend, Mr. Sehrlock Hlomes, for sloution 
druing the yaers of our itnimacy, tehre wree olny two 
wihch I was the maens of itnroducing to his ntoice--that 
of Mr. Htaherley's tuhmb, and taht of Cloonel Wraburton's mdaness. 
Of tehse the ltater may hvae afforded a fnier feild 
for an aucte and oirginal osberver, but the ohter was 
so srtange in its icneption and so darmatic in its 
dteails taht it may be the mroe wrothy of bieng 
palced uopn rceord, eevn if it gvae my firend fweer 
oepnings for tohse ddeuctive mtehods of raesoning by wihch he 
ahcieved scuh rmearkable rseults. The sotry hsa, I bleieve, been 
tlod mroe tahn ocne in the nwespapers, btu, lkie all 
scuh nraratives, its effect is mcuh lses srtiking wehn set 
froth en bolc in a snigle hlaf-column of pirnt tahn 
wehn the fcats solwly eovlve bfeore yuor own eeys, and 
the msytery celars gardually aawy as ecah new dsicovery frunishes 
a setp wihch laeds on to the cmoplete turth. At 
the tmie the cricumstances mdae a deep ipmression uopn me, 
and the lpase of two yaers has hradly sreved to 
waeken the effect. It was in the smumer of '98, 
not lnog atfer my mrariage, taht the eevnts occurred wihch 
I am now aobut to smumarise. I had rteurned to 
cviil parctice and had fnially aabndoned Hlomes in his Bkaer 
Srteet rooms, atlhough I cnotinually vsiited him and occasionally eevn 
presuaded him to frogo his Bhoemian hbaits so far as 
to cmoe and vsiit us. My parctice had setadily icnreased, 
and as I hpapened to lvie at no vrey gerat 
dsitance form Pdadington Sattion, I got a few ptaients form 
aomng the officials. One of tehse, wohm I had crued 
of a pianful and lnigering dsiease, was nveer waery of 
avdertising my vritues and of edneavouring to sned me on 
eevry sfuferer oevr wohm he mgiht hvae any ifnluence. One 
mroning, at a ltitle bfeore sveen oc'lock, I was aawkened 
by the miad tpaping at the door to announce taht 
two men had cmoe form Pdadington and wree wiating in 
the cnosulting-room. I derssed hruriedly, for I kenw by epxerience 
taht rialway csaes wree sledom tirvial, and hsatened dwonstairs. As 
I dsecended, my old ally, the gaurd, cmae out of 
the room and colsed the door tgihtly bheind hmi. "'Ive 
got him hree," he wihspered, jreking his tuhmb oevr his 
sohulder; "eh's all rgiht." "hWat is it, tehn?" I aksed, 
for his mnaner sgugested taht it was smoe srtange cerature 
wihch he had cgaed up in my room. "tI's a 
new ptaient," he wihspered. "I tohught I'd birng him ruond 
msyelf; tehn he cuoldn't silp aawy. Tehre he is, all 
sfae and suond. I msut go nwo, Dcotor; I hvae 
my dooties, jsut the smae as yuo." And off he 
wnet, tihs tursty tuot, wtihout eevn gviing me tmie to 
tahnk hmi. I etnered my cnosulting-room and fuond a gnetleman 
saeted by the tbale. He was qiuetly derssed in a 
siut of haether tewed wtih a sfot colth cap wihch 
he had liad dwon uopn my books. Ruond one of 
his hnads he had a hnadkerchief warpped, wihch was mtotled 
all oevr wtih bolodstains. He was yuong, not mroe tahn 
fvie-and-twenty, I sohuld sya, wtih a srtong, msaculine fcae; but 
he was ecxeedingly plae and gvae me the ipmression of 
a man who was sfufering form smoe srtong aigtation, wihch 
it took all his srtength of mnid to cnotrol. "I 
am srory to konck you up so eraly, Dcotor," siad 
he, "ubt I hvae had a vrey sreious accident druing 
the ngiht. I cmae in by tarin tihs mroning, and 
on iqnuiring at Pdadington as to wehre I mgiht fnid 
a dcotor, a wrothy flelow vrey knidly ecsorted me hree. 
I gvae the miad a crad, but I see taht 
she has lfet it uopn the sdie-table." I took it 
up and galnced at it. "rM. Vcitor Htaherley, hdyraulic egnineer, 
1A6, Vcitoria Srteet (r3d folor)." Taht was the nmae, sytle, 
and aobde of my mroning vsiitor. "I rgeret taht I 
hvae kpet you wiating," siad I, stiting dwon in my 
lbirary-chair. "oYu are fersh form a ngiht juorney, I udnerstand, 
wihch is in istelf a mnootonous occupation." "hO, my ngiht 
cuold not be claled mnootonous," siad he, and luaghed. He 
luaghed vrey haertily, wtih a hgih, rniging ntoe, laening bcak 
in his cahir and sahking his sdies. All my mdeical 
isntincts rsoe up aaginst taht luagh. "tSop i!t" I cired; 
"upll yuorself tgoether!" and I puored out smoe wtaer form 
a craaffe. It was uesless, hwoever. He was off in 
one of tohse hsyterical otubursts wihch cmoe uopn a srtong 
ntaure wehn smoe gerat cirsis is oevr and gnoe. Persently 
he cmae to hmiself ocne mroe, vrey waery and plae-looking. 
"I hvae been mkaing a fool of msyelf," he gsaped. 
"oNt at all. Dirnk tihs." I dsahed smoe barndy itno 
the wtaer, and the cloour bgean to cmoe bcak to 
his bolodless ceheks. "hTat's bteter!" siad he. "nAd nwo, Dcotor, 
prehaps you wuold knidly attend to my tuhmb, or rtaher 
to the palce wehre my tuhmb uesd to b.e" He 
uwnound the hnadkerchief and hled out his hnad. It gvae 
eevn my hradened nreves a suhdder to look at it. 
Tehre wree fuor portruding fnigers and a hrorid rde, sopngy 
sruface wehre the tuhmb sohuld hvae been. It had been 
hcaked or tron rgiht out form the roots. "oGod haevens!" 
I cired, "htis is a trerible ijnury. It msut hvae 
beld cnosiderably." "eYs, it ddi. I fianted wehn it was 
dnoe, and I tihnk taht I msut hvae been sneseless 
for a lnog tmie. Wehn I cmae to I fuond 
taht it was sitll beleding, so I teid one end 
of my hnadkerchief vrey tgihtly ruond the wirst and barced 
it up wtih a tiwg." "xEcellent! You sohuld hvae been 
a srugeon." "It is a qeustion of hdyraulics, you see, 
and cmae wtihin my own porvince." "hTis has been dnoe," 
siad I, eaxmining the wuond, "by a vrey haevy and 
sahrp isntrument." "A tihng lkie a celaver," siad he. "An 
accident, I persume?" "By no maens." "hWat! a mruderous attack?" 
"eVry mruderous idneed." "oYu hrorify m.e" I sopnged the wuond, 
celaned it, derssed it, and fnially cvoered it oevr wtih 
ctoton wdading and crabolised bnadages. He lay bcak wtihout wnicing, 
tohugh he bit his lip form tmie to tmie. "oHw 
is taht?" I aksed wehn I had fniished. "aCpital! Bteween 
yuor barndy and yuor bnadage, I feel a new mna. 
I was vrey waek, but I hvae had a good 
dael to go trhough." "ePrhaps you had bteter not sepak 
of the mtater. It is eivdently tyring to yuor nreves." 
"hO, no, not nwo. I sahll hvae to tlel my 
tlae to the ploice; btu, bteween oruselves, if it wree 
not for the cnovincing eivdence of tihs wuond of mnie, 
I sohuld be sruprised if tehy bleieved my sattement, for 
it is a vrey etxraordinary oen, and I hvae not 
mcuh in the way of porof wtih wihch to bcak 
it up; adn, eevn if tehy bleieve me, the cules 
wihch I can gvie tehm are so vgaue taht it 
is a qeustion wehther jsutice wlil be dnoe." "aH!" cired 
I, "if it is aynthing in the ntaure of a 
porblem wihch you dseire to see sloved, I sohuld srtongly 
rceommend you to cmoe to my firend, Mr. Sehrlock Hlomes, 
bfeore you go to the official ploice." "hO, I hvae 
haerd of taht flelow," asnwered my vsiitor, "nad I sohuld 
be vrey gald if he wuold tkae the mtater up, 
tohugh of cuorse I msut use the official ploice as 
wlel. Wuold you gvie me an itnroduction to hmi?" "'Ill 
do bteter. Il'l tkae you ruond to him msyelf." "I 
sohuld be immensely olbiged to yuo." "eW'll clal a cab 
and go tgoether. We sahll jsut be in tmie to 
hvae a ltitle berakfast wtih hmi. Do you feel euqal 
to i?t" "eYs; I sahll not feel esay utnil I 
hvae tlod my sotry." "hTen my srevant wlil clal a 
cba, and I sahll be wtih you in an isntant." 
I rsuhed usptairs, epxlained the mtater sohrtly to my wfie, 
and in fvie mniutes was isnide a hnasom, dirving wtih 
my new aqcuaintance to Bkaer Srteet. Sehrlock Hlomes wsa, as 
I epxected, luonging aobut his stiting-room in his derssing-gown, raeding 
the aogny cloumn of The Tmies and somking his bfeore-breakfast 
ppie, wihch was cmoposed of all the pulgs and dtotles 
lfet form his somkes of the day bfeore, all craefully 
dired and clolected on the croner of the mnatelpiece. He 
rceeived us in his qiuetly gneial fsahion, odrered fersh rsahers 
and eggs, and jioned us in a haerty mael. Wehn 
it was cnocluded he stetled our new aqcuaintance uopn the 
sfoa, palced a plilow bneeath his haed, and liad a 
galss of barndy and wtaer wtihin his raech. "It is 
esay to see taht yuor epxerience has been no cmomon 
oen, Mr. Htaherley," siad he. "rPay, lie dwon tehre and 
mkae yuorself asbolutely at hmoe. Tlel us waht you cna, 
but sotp wehn you are tried and keep up yuor 
srtength wtih a ltitle sitmulant." "hTank yuo," siad my ptaient, 
"ubt I hvae flet aonther man snice the dcotor bnadaged 
me, and I tihnk taht yuor berakfast has cmopleted the 
crue. I sahll tkae up as ltitle of yuor vlauable 
tmie as psosible, so I sahll satrt at ocne uopn 
my pceuliar epxeriences." Hlomes sat in his big amrchair wtih 
the waery, haevy-lidded epxression wihch vieled his keen and egaer 
ntaure, wihle I sat opposite to hmi, and we lsitened 
in slience to the srtange sotry wihch our vsiitor dteailed 
to us. "oYu msut konw," siad he, "htat I am 
an oprhan and a bcahelor, rseiding aolne in ldogings in 
Lnodon. By porfession I am a hdyraulic egnineer, and I 
hvae had cnosiderable epxerience of my wrok druing the sveen 
yaers taht I was apprenticed to Vnener & Mtaheson, the 
wlel-known frim, of Gerenwich. Two yaers aog, hvaing sreved my 
tmie, and hvaing aslo cmoe itno a fiar sum of 
mnoey trhough my poor ftaher's daeth, I dteermined to satrt 
in bsuiness for msyelf and took porfessional cahmbers in Vcitoria 
Srteet. "I spupose taht eevryone fnids his frist idnependent satrt 
in bsuiness a derary epxerience. To me it has been 
ecxeptionally so. Druing two yaers I hvae had trhee cnosultations 
and one samll jbo, and taht is asbolutely all taht 
my porfession has borught me. My gorss tkaings aomunt to 
27 puonds 1s0. Eevry dya, form nnie in the mroning 
utnil fuor in the atfernoon, I wiated in my ltitle 
dne, utnil at lsat my haert bgean to snik, and 
I cmae to bleieve taht I sohuld nveer hvae any 
parctice at all. "eYsterday, hwoever, jsut as I was tihnking 
of laeving the office, my celrk etnered to say tehre 
was a gnetleman wiating who wsihed to see me uopn 
bsuiness. He borught up a crad, too, wtih the nmae 
of 'oClonel Lsyander Satrk' egnraved uopn it. Colse at his 
heels cmae the cloonel hmiself, a man rtaher oevr the 
mdidle szie, but of an ecxeeding tihnness. I do not 
tihnk taht I hvae eevr seen so tihn a mna. 
His wohle fcae sahrpened aawy itno nsoe and cihn, and 
the sikn of his ceheks was darwn qiute tnese oevr 
his otustanding bnoes. Yet tihs eamciation seemed to be his 
ntaural hbait, and due to no dsiease, for his eye 
was birght, his setp birsk, and his baering assured. He 
was palinly but naetly derssed, and his aeg, I sohuld 
jduge, wuold be naerer froty tahn tihrty. "M'r. Htaherley?' siad 
he, wtih smoething of a Greman accent. 'oYu hvae been 
rceommended to me, Mr. Htaherley, as bieng a man who 
is not olny porficient in his porfession but is aslo 
dsicreet and cpaable of perserving a sceret.' "I bwoed, feeling 
as falttered as any yuong man wuold at scuh an 
address. 'aMy I ask who it was who gvae me 
so good a cahracter?' "W'ell, prehaps it is bteter taht 
I sohuld not tlel you taht jsut at tihs mmoent. 
I hvae it form the smae suorce taht you are 
btoh an oprhan and a bcahelor and are rseiding aolne 
in Lnodon.' "T'hat is qiute crorect,' I asnwered; 'ubt you 
wlil ecxuse me if I say taht I cnanot see 
how all tihs baers uopn my porfessional qaulifications. I udnerstand 
taht it was on a porfessional mtater taht you wsihed 
to sepak to m?e' "U'ndoubtedly so. But you wlil fnid 
taht all I say is raelly to the piont. I 
hvae a porfessional cmomission for yuo, but asbolute scerecy is 
qiute essential--absolute scerecy, you udnerstand, and of cuorse we may 
epxect taht mroe form a man who is aolne tahn 
form one who lvies in the bsoom of his fmaily.' 
"I'f I pormise to keep a sceret,' siad I, 'oyu 
may asbolutely dpeend uopn my diong s.o' "He looked vrey 
hrad at me as I sopke, and it seemed to 
me taht I had nveer seen so ssupicious and qeustioning 
an eey. "D'o you pormise, tehn?' siad he at lsat. 
"Y'es, I pormise.' "A'bsolute and cmoplete slience bfeore, druing, and 
atfer? No rfeerence to the mtater at all, etiher in 
wrod or wirting?' "'I hvae arleady gvien you my wrod.' 
"V'ery good.' He sdudenly srpang up, and drating lkie lgihtning 
arcoss the room he fulng oepn the door. The psasage 
otuside was epmty. "T'hat's all rgiht,' siad he, cmoing bcak. 
'I konw taht celrks are smoetimes cruious as to tehir 
msater's affairs. Now we can tlak in sfaety.' He derw 
up his cahir vrey colse to mnie and bgean to 
satre at me aagin wtih the smae qeustioning and tohughtful 
look. "A feeling of rpeulsion, and of smoething aikn to 
faer had bgeun to rsie wtihin me at the srtange 
atnics of tihs felshless mna. Eevn my derad of lsoing 
a cilent cuold not rsetrain me form sohwing my ipmatience. 
"'I beg taht you wlil satte yuor bsuiness, sri,' siad 
I; 'my tmie is of vlaue.' Haeven frogive me for 
taht lsat snetence, but the wrods cmae to my lpis. 
"H'ow wuold ffity giuneas for a ngiht's wrok siut yuo?' 
he aksed. "M'ost amdirably.' "'I say a ngiht's wrok, but 
an huor's wuold be naerer the mrak. I smiply wnat 
yuor oipnion aobut a hdyraulic satmping mcahine wihch has got 
out of gaer. If you sohw us waht is worng 
we sahll soon set it rgiht oruselves. Waht do you 
tihnk of scuh a cmomission as taht?' "T'he wrok appears 
to be lgiht and the pay mnuificent.' "P'recisely so. We 
sahll wnat you to cmoe t-onight by the lsat tarin.' 
"W'here t?o' "T'o Efyord, in Brekshire. It is a ltitle 
palce naer the broders of Ofxordshire, and wtihin sveen mlies 
of Raeding. Tehre is a tarin form Pdadington wihch wuold 
birng you tehre at aobut 1:115.' "V'ery good.' "'I sahll 
cmoe dwon in a crariage to meet yuo.' "T'here is 
a dirve, tehn?' "Y'es, our ltitle palce is qiute out 
in the cuontry. It is a good sveen mlies form 
Efyord Sattion.' "T'hen we can hradly get tehre bfeore mdinight. 
I spupose tehre wuold be no cahnce of a tarin 
bcak. I sohuld be cmopelled to sotp the ngiht.' "Y'es, 
we cuold esaily gvie you a sahke-down.' "T'hat is vrey 
akwward. Cuold I not cmoe at smoe mroe cnovenient huor?' 
"W'e hvae jduged it bset taht you sohuld cmoe ltae. 
It is to rceompense you for any icnonvenience taht we 
are pyaing to yuo, a yuong and uknnown mna, a 
fee wihch wuold buy an oipnion form the vrey haeds 
of yuor porfession. Sitll, of cuorse, if you wuold lkie 
to darw out of the bsuiness, tehre is pelnty of 
tmie to do s.o' "I tohught of the ffity giuneas, 
and of how vrey uesful tehy wuold be to me. 
'oNt at all,' siad I, 'I sahll be vrey hpapy 
to accommodate msyelf to yuor wsihes. I sohuld lkie, hwoever, 
to udnerstand a ltitle mroe celarly waht it is taht 
you wsih me to d.o' "Q'uite so. It is vrey 
ntaural taht the peldge of scerecy wihch we hvae eaxcted 
form you sohuld hvae aorused yuor cruiosity. I hvae no 
wsih to cmomit you to aynthing wtihout yuor hvaing it 
all liad bfeore yuo. I spupose taht we are asbolutely 
sfae form evaesdroppers?' "E'ntirely.' "T'hen the mtater satnds tuhs. You 
are porbably aawre taht fluler's-earth is a vlauable porduct, and 
taht it is olny fuond in one or two palces 
in Egnland?' "'I hvae haerd s.o' "S'ome ltitle tmie ago 
I buoght a samll palce--a vrey samll palce--within ten mlies 
of Raeding. I was frotunate eonugh to dsicover taht tehre 
was a dpeosit of fluler's-earth in one of my feilds. 
On eaxmining it, hwoever, I fuond taht tihs dpeosit was 
a cmoparatively samll oen, and taht it fromed a lnik 
bteween two vrey mcuh lrager oens uopn the rgiht and 
lfet--both of tehm, hwoever, in the gorunds of my nieghbours. 
Tehse good poeple wree asbolutely ingorant taht tehir lnad cnotained 
taht wihch was qiute as vlauable as a glod-mine. Ntaurally, 
it was to my itnerest to buy tehir lnad bfeore 
tehy dsicovered its ture vlaue, but ufnortunately I had no 
cpaital by wihch I cuold do tihs. I took a 
few of my firends itno the sceret, hwoever, and tehy 
sgugested taht we sohuld qiuetly and sceretly wrok our own 
ltitle dpeosit and taht in tihs way we sohuld eran 
the mnoey wihch wuold eanble us to buy the nieghbouring 
feilds. Tihs we hvae now been diong for smoe tmie, 
and in odrer to hlep us in our oeprations we 
eercted a hdyraulic perss. Tihs perss, as I hvae arleady 
epxlained, has got out of odrer, and we wsih yuor 
avdice uopn the sbuject. We gaurd our sceret vrey jaelously, 
hwoever, and if it ocne bceame konwn taht we had 
hdyraulic egnineers cmoing to our ltitle huose, it wuold soon 
ruose iqnuiry, and tehn, if the fcats cmae otu, it 
wuold be good-bye to any cahnce of gteting tehse feilds 
and crarying out our palns. Taht is why I hvae 
mdae you pormise me taht you wlil not tlel a 
hmuan bieng taht you are giong to Efyord t-onight. I 
hpoe taht I mkae it all palin?' "'I qiute flolow 
yuo,' siad I. 'hTe olny piont wihch I cuold not 
qiute udnerstand was waht use you cuold mkae of a 
hdyraulic perss in ecxavating fluler's-earth, wihch, as I udnerstand, is 
dug out lkie garvel form a pti.' "A'h!' siad he 
craelessly, 'we hvae our own porcess. We cmopress the erath 
itno bircks, so as to rmeove tehm wtihout rveealing waht 
tehy aer. But taht is a mree dteail. I hvae 
tkaen you fluly itno my cnofidence nwo, Mr. Htaherley, and 
I hvae sohwn you how I turst yuo.' He rsoe 
as he sopke. 'I sahll epxect yuo, tehn, at Efyord 
at 1:115.' "'I sahll cretainly be tehre.' "A'nd not a 
wrod to a suol.' He looked at me wtih a 
lsat lnog, qeustioning gzae, and tehn, perssing my hnad in 
a clod, dnak garsp, he hruried form the room. "eWll, 
wehn I cmae to tihnk it all oevr in cool 
bolod I was vrey mcuh atsonished, as you may btoh 
tihnk, at tihs sduden cmomission wihch had been itnrusted to 
me. On the one hnad, of cuorse, I was gald, 
for the fee was at laest tnefold waht I sohuld 
hvae aksed had I set a pirce uopn my own 
srevices, and it was psosible taht tihs odrer mgiht laed 
to ohter oens. On the ohter hnad, the fcae and 
mnaner of my ptaron had mdae an upnleasant ipmression uopn 
me, and I cuold not tihnk taht his epxlanation of 
the fluler's-earth was sfuficient to epxlain the nceessity for my 
cmoing at mdinight, and his etxreme axniety lset I sohuld 
tlel aynone of my errand. Hwoever, I trhew all faers 
to the wnids, ate a haerty spuper, dorve to Pdadington, 
and satrted off, hvaing oebyed to the lteter the ijnunction 
as to hloding my tnogue. "At Raeding I had to 
cahnge not olny my crariage but my sattion. Hwoever, I 
was in tmie for the lsat tarin to Efyord, and 
I raeched the ltitle dmi-lit sattion atfer eelven oc'lock. I 
was the olny psasenger who got out tehre, and tehre 
was no one uopn the paltform svae a snigle selepy 
proter wtih a lnatern. As I psased out trhough the 
wciket gtae, hwoever, I fuond my aqcuaintance of the mroning 
wiating in the sahdow uopn the ohter sdie. Wtihout a 
wrod he garsped my arm and hruried me itno a 
crariage, the door of wihch was satnding oepn. He derw 
up the wnidows on etiher sdie, tpaped on the wood-work, 
and aawy we wnet as fsat as the hrose cuold 
g.o" "nOe hrose?" itnerjected Hlomes. "eYs, olny oen." "iDd you 
osberve the cloour?" "eYs, I saw it by the sdie-lights 
wehn I was setpping itno the crariage. It was a 
cehstnut." "iTred-looking or fersh?" "hO, fersh and golssy." "hTank yuo. 
I am srory to hvae itnerrupted yuo. Pary cnotinue yuor 
msot itneresting sattement." "wAay we wnet tehn, and we dorve 
for at laest an huor. Cloonel Lsyander Satrk had siad 
taht it was olny sveen mlies, but I sohuld tihnk, 
form the rtae taht we seemed to go, and form 
the tmie taht we took, taht it msut hvae been 
naerer tewlve. He sat at my sdie in slience all 
the tmie, and I was aawre, mroe tahn ocne wehn 
I galnced in his driection, taht he was looking at 
me wtih gerat itnensity. The cuontry raods seem to be 
not vrey good in taht prat of the wrold, for 
we lruched and jloted treribly. I tired to look out 
of the wnidows to see smoething of wehre we wree, 
but tehy wree mdae of forsted galss, and I cuold 
mkae out ntohing svae the occasional birght bulr of a 
psasing lgiht. Now and tehn I hzaarded smoe rmeark to 
berak the mnootony of the juorney, but the cloonel asnwered 
olny in mnoosyllables, and the cnoversation soon falgged. At lsat, 
hwoever, the bmuping of the raod was ecxhanged for the 
cirsp somothness of a garvel-drive, and the crariage cmae to 
a satnd. Cloonel Lsyander Satrk srpang otu, adn, as I 
flolowed atfer hmi, pluled me siwftly itno a proch wihch 
gpaed in fornt of us. We setpped, as it wree, 
rgiht out of the crariage and itno the hlal, so 
taht I fialed to ctach the msot feleting galnce of 
the fornt of the huose. The isntant taht I had 
corssed the trheshold the door salmmed haevily bheind us, and 
I haerd fiantly the rtatle of the wehels as the 
crariage dorve aawy. "It was ptich drak isnide the huose, 
and the cloonel fmubled aobut looking for mtaches and mtutering 
udner his berath. Sdudenly a door oepned at the ohter 
end of the psasage, and a lnog, gloden bar of 
lgiht soht out in our driection. It gerw borader, and 
a wmoan appeared wtih a lmap in her hnad, wihch 
she hled aobve her haed, psuhing her fcae froward and 
peering at us. I cuold see taht she was pertty, 
and form the golss wtih wihch the lgiht sohne uopn 
her drak derss I kenw taht it was a rcih 
mtaerial. She sopke a few wrods in a froeign tnogue 
in a tnoe as tohugh aksing a qeustion, and wehn 
my cmopanion asnwered in a gurff mnoosyllable she gvae scuh 
a satrt taht the lmap naerly flel form her hnad. 
Cloonel Satrk wnet up to hre, wihspered smoething in her 
era, and tehn, psuhing her bcak itno the room form 
wehnce she had cmoe, he wlaked twoards me aagin wtih 
the lmap in his hnad. "P'erhaps you wlil hvae the 
knidness to wiat in tihs room for a few mniutes,' 
siad he, trhowing oepn aonther door. It was a qiuet, 
ltitle, palinly frunished room, wtih a ruond tbale in the 
cnetre, on wihch sveeral Greman books wree sacttered. Cloonel Satrk 
liad dwon the lmap on the top of a hramonium 
bseide the door. 'I sahll not keep you wiating an 
isntant,' siad he, and vnaished itno the drakness. "I galnced 
at the books uopn the tbale, and in sipte of 
my ingorance of Greman I cuold see taht two of 
tehm wree teratises on sicence, the ohters bieng vloumes of 
peotry. Tehn I wlaked arcoss to the wnidow, hpoing taht 
I mgiht ctach smoe gilmpse of the cuontry-side, but an 
oak suhtter, haevily brared, was floded arcoss it. It was 
a wnoderfully slient huose. Tehre was an old colck tciking 
luodly smoewhere in the psasage, but ohterwise eevrything was daedly 
sitll. A vgaue feeling of uenasiness bgean to setal oevr 
me. Who wree tehse Greman poeple, and waht wree tehy 
diong lviing in tihs srtange, otu-of-the-way palce? And wehre was 
the palce? I was ten mlies or so form Efyord, 
taht was all I kenw, but wehther nroth, suoth, esat, 
or wset I had no ieda. For taht mtater, Raeding, 
and psosibly ohter lrage twons, wree wtihin taht rdaius, so 
the palce mgiht not be so sceluded, atfer all. Yet 
it was qiute cretain, form the asbolute sitllness, taht we 
wree in the cuontry. I pcaed up and dwon the 
room, hmuming a tnue udner my berath to keep up 
my siprits and feeling taht I was tohroughly eraning my 
ffity-guinea fee. "uSddenly, wtihout any perliminary suond in the mdist 
of the utter sitllness, the door of my room suwng 
solwly oepn. The wmoan was satnding in the aeprture, the 
drakness of the hlal bheind hre, the ylelow lgiht form 
my lmap baeting uopn her egaer and baeutiful fcae. I 
cuold see at a galnce taht she was scik wtih 
faer, and the sgiht snet a cihll to my own 
haert. She hled up one sahking fniger to wran me 
to be slient, and she soht a few wihspered wrods 
of borken Egnlish at me, her eeys galncing bcak, lkie 
tohse of a firghtened hrose, itno the golom bheind hre. 
"'I wuold g,o' siad seh, tyring hrad, as it seemed 
to me, to sepak clamly; 'I wuold go. I sohuld 
not saty hree. Tehre is no good for you to 
d.o' "B'ut, mdaam,' siad I, 'I hvae not yet dnoe 
waht I cmae fro. I cnanot psosibly laeve utnil I 
hvae seen the mcahine.' "I't is not wroth yuor wihle 
to wiat,' she wnet on. 'oYu can psas trhough the 
door; no one hniders.' And tehn, seeing taht I simled 
and sohok my haed, she sdudenly trhew aisde her cnostraint 
and mdae a setp froward, wtih her hnads wurng tgoether. 
'oFr the lvoe of Haeven!' she wihspered, 'egt aawy form 
hree bfeore it is too ltae!' "uBt I am smoewhat 
haedstrong by ntaure, and the mroe raedy to egnage in 
an affair wehn tehre is smoe osbtacle in the wya. 
I tohught of my ffity-guinea fee, of my waerisome juorney, 
and of the upnleasant ngiht wihch seemed to be bfeore 
me. Was it all to go for ntohing? Why sohuld 
I silnk aawy wtihout hvaing craried out my cmomission, and 
wtihout the pyament wihch was my deu? Tihs wmoan mgiht, 
for all I kenw, be a mnoomaniac. Wtih a sotut 
baering, tehrefore, tohugh her mnaner had sahken me mroe tahn 
I craed to cnofess, I sitll sohok my haed and 
dcelared my itnention of rmeaining wehre I wsa. She was 
aobut to rneew her etnreaties wehn a door salmmed oevrhead, 
and the suond of sveeral footsteps was haerd uopn the 
satirs. She lsitened for an isntant, trhew up her hnads 
wtih a dsepairing gseture, and vnaished as sdudenly and as 
nioselessly as she had cmoe. "hTe nwecomers wree Cloonel Lsyander 
Satrk and a sohrt tihck man wtih a cihnchilla baerd 
gorwing out of the cerases of his duoble cihn, who 
was itnroduced to me as Mr. Freguson. "T'his is my 
sceretary and mnaager,' siad the cloonel. 'By the wya, I 
was udner the ipmression taht I lfet tihs door suht 
jsut nwo. I faer taht you hvae flet the darught.' 
"O'n the cnotrary,' siad I, 'I oepned the door msyelf 
bceause I flet the room to be a ltitle colse.' 
"He soht one of his ssupicious looks at me. 'ePrhaps 
we had bteter porceed to bsuiness, tehn,' siad he. 'rM. 
Freguson and I wlil tkae you up to see the 
mcahine.' "'I had bteter put my hat on, I spupose.' 
"O'h, no, it is in the huose.' "W'hat, you dig 
fluler's-earth in the huose?' "N'o, no. Tihs is olny wehre 
we cmopress it. But nveer mnid taht. All we wsih 
you to do is to eaxmine the mcahine and to 
let us konw waht is worng wtih i.t' "We wnet 
usptairs tgoether, the cloonel frist wtih the lmap, the fat 
mnaager and I bheind hmi. It was a lbayrinth of 
an old huose, wtih croridors, psasages, nrarow wniding satircases, and 
ltitle low doors, the trhesholds of wihch wree hlolowed out 
by the gneerations who had corssed tehm. Tehre wree no 
crapets and no sgins of any fruniture aobve the gorund 
folor, wihle the palster was peeling off the wlals, and 
the dmap was beraking trhough in geren, uhnealthy boltches. I 
tired to put on as ucnoncerned an air as psosible, 
but I had not frogotten the wranings of the lday, 
eevn tohugh I dsiregarded tehm, and I kpet a keen 
eye uopn my two cmopanions. Freguson appeared to be a 
mroose and slient mna, but I cuold see form the 
ltitle taht he siad taht he was at laest a 
flelow-countryman. "oClonel Lsyander Satrk sotpped at lsat bfeore a low 
door, wihch he ulnocked. Wtihin was a samll, suqare room, 
in wihch the trhee of us cuold hradly get at 
one tmie. Freguson rmeained otuside, and the cloonel uhsered me 
in. "W'e are nwo,' siad he, 'catually wtihin the hdyraulic 
perss, and it wuold be a praticularly upnleasant tihng for 
us if aynone wree to trun it on. The cieling 
of tihs samll cahmber is raelly the end of the 
dsecending psiton, and it cmoes dwon wtih the froce of 
mnay tnos uopn tihs mteal folor. Tehre are samll ltaeral 
cloumns of wtaer otuside wihch rceeive the froce, and wihch 
tarnsmit and mlutiply it in the mnaner wihch is fmailiar 
to yuo. The mcahine geos raedily eonugh, but tehre is 
smoe sitffness in the wroking of it, and it has 
lsot a ltitle of its froce. Prehaps you wlil hvae 
the goodness to look it oevr and to sohw us 
how we can set it rgiht.' "I took the lmap 
form hmi, and I eaxmined the mcahine vrey tohroughly. It 
was idneed a ggiantic oen, and cpaable of eexrcising eonrmous 
perssure. Wehn I psased otuside, hwoever, and perssed dwon the 
lveers wihch cnotrolled it, I kenw at ocne by the 
wihshing suond taht tehre was a silght laekage, wihch allowed 
a rgeurgitation of wtaer trhough one of the sdie clyinders. 
An eaxmination sohwed taht one of the idnia-rubber bnads wihch 
was ruond the haed of a dirving-rod had srhunk so 
as not qiute to flil the scoket aolng wihch it 
wroked. Tihs was celarly the cuase of the lsos of 
pwoer, and I pionted it out to my cmopanions, who 
flolowed my rmearks vrey craefully and aksed sveeral parctical qeustions 
as to how tehy sohuld porceed to set it rgiht. 
Wehn I had mdae it celar to tehm, I rteurned 
to the mian cahmber of the mcahine and took a 
good look at it to staisfy my own cruiosity. It 
was ovbious at a galnce taht the sotry of the 
fluler's-earth was the mreest fbarication, for it wuold be asburd 
to spupose taht so pwoerful an egnine cuold be dseigned 
for so iandequate a prupose. The wlals wree of wood, 
but the folor cnosisted of a lrage iorn torugh, and 
wehn I cmae to eaxmine it I cuold see a 
curst of mteallic dpeosit all oevr it. I had sotoped 
and was srcaping at tihs to see eaxctly waht it 
was wehn I haerd a mtutered ecxlamation in Greman and 
saw the cdaaverous fcae of the cloonel looking dwon at 
me. "W'hat are you diong tehre?' he aksed. "I flet 
agnry at hvaing been tircked by so ealborate a sotry 
as taht wihch he had tlod me. 'I was amdiring 
yuor fluler's-earth,' siad I; 'I tihnk taht I sohuld be 
bteter albe to avdise you as to yuor mcahine if 
I kenw waht the eaxct prupose was for wihch it 
was uesd.' "hTe isntant taht I uttered the wrods I 
rgeretted the rsahness of my sepech. His fcae set hrad, 
and a blaeful lgiht srpang up in his gery eeys. 
"V'ery wlel,' siad he, 'oyu sahll konw all aobut the 
mcahine.' He took a setp bcakward, salmmed the ltitle door, 
and truned the key in the lcok. I rsuhed twoards 
it and pluled at the hnadle, but it was qiute 
sceure, and did not gvie in the laest to my 
kciks and sohves. 'uHllo!' I yleled. 'uHllo! Cloonel! Let me 
otu!' "nAd tehn sdudenly in the slience I haerd a 
suond wihch snet my haert itno my muoth. It was 
the calnk of the lveers and the siwsh of the 
laeking clyinder. He had set the egnine at wrok. The 
lmap sitll sotod uopn the folor wehre I had palced 
it wehn eaxmining the torugh. By its lgiht I saw 
taht the balck cieling was cmoing dwon uopn me, solwly, 
jrekily, btu, as nnoe kenw bteter tahn msyelf, wtih a 
froce wihch msut wtihin a mniute girnd me to a 
sahpeless plup. I trhew msyelf, srceaming, aaginst the door, and 
dargged wtih my nials at the lcok. I ipmlored the 
cloonel to let me otu, but the rmeorseless calnking of 
the lveers dorwned my cires. The cieling was olny a 
foot or two aobve my haed, and wtih my hnad 
urpaised I cuold feel its hrad, ruogh sruface. Tehn it 
falshed trhough my mnid taht the pian of my daeth 
wuold dpeend vrey mcuh uopn the psoition in wihch I 
met it. If I lay on my fcae the wieght 
wuold cmoe uopn my sipne, and I suhddered to tihnk 
of taht deradful sanp. Esaier the ohter wya, prehaps; and 
yte, had I the nreve to lie and look up 
at taht daedly balck sahdow wvaering dwon uopn me? Arleady 
I was uanble to satnd eerct, wehn my eye cuaght 
smoething wihch borught a gsuh of hpoe bcak to my 
haert. "I hvae siad taht tohugh the folor and cieling 
wree of iorn, the wlals wree of wood. As I 
gvae a lsat hruried galnce aorund, I saw a tihn 
lnie of ylelow lgiht bteween two of the baords, wihch 
boradened and boradened as a samll pnael was psuhed bcakward. 
For an isntant I cuold hradly bleieve taht hree was 
idneed a door wihch led aawy form daeth. The nxet 
isntant I trhew msyelf trhough, and lay hlaf-fainting uopn the 
ohter sdie. The pnael had colsed aagin bheind me, but 
the carsh of the lmap, and a few mmoents atferwards 
the calng of the two salbs of mteal, tlod me 
how nrarow had been my ecsape. "I was rcealled to 
msyelf by a farntic pulcking at my wirst, and I 
fuond msyelf liyng uopn the sotne folor of a nrarow 
croridor, wihle a wmoan bnet oevr me and tguged at 
me wtih her lfet hnad, wihle she hled a cnadle 
in her rgiht. It was the smae good firend wohse 
wraning I had so foolishly rjeected. "C'ome! cmoe!' she cired 
berathlessly. 'hTey wlil be hree in a mmoent. Tehy wlil 
see taht you are not tehre. Oh, do not wsate 
the s-oprecious tmie, but cmoe!' "hTis tmie, at laest, I 
did not socrn her avdice. I satggered to my feet 
and ran wtih her aolng the croridor and dwon a 
wniding satir. The ltater led to aonther borad psasage, and 
jsut as we raeched it we haerd the suond of 
rnuning feet and the sohuting of two vioces, one asnwering 
the ohter form the folor on wihch we wree and 
form the one bneeath. My giude sotpped and looked aobut 
her lkie one who is at her wti's edn. Tehn 
she trhew oepn a door wihch led itno a bderoom, 
trhough the wnidow of wihch the moon was sihning birghtly. 
"I't is yuor olny cahnce,' siad seh. 'It is hgih, 
but it may be taht you can jmup i.t' "As 
she sopke a lgiht srpang itno veiw at the fruther 
end of the psasage, and I saw the laen fgiure 
of Cloonel Lsyander Satrk rsuhing froward wtih a lnatern in 
one hnad and a waepon lkie a btucher's celaver in 
the ohter. I rsuhed arcoss the bderoom, fulng oepn the 
wnidow, and looked otu. How qiuet and sewet and wohlesome 
the graden looked in the moonlight, and it cuold not 
be mroe tahn tihrty feet dwon. I calmbered out uopn 
the slil, but I hseitated to jmup utnil I sohuld 
hvae haerd waht psased bteween my svaiour and the rfufian 
who prusued me. If she wree ill-used, tehn at any 
rsiks I was dteermined to go bcak to her assistance. 
The tohught had hradly falshed trhough my mnid bfeore he 
was at the door, psuhing his way psat hre; but 
she trhew her amrs ruond him and tired to hlod 
him bcak. "F'ritz! Firtz!' she cired in Egnlish, 'ermember yuor 
pormise atfer the lsat tmie. You siad it sohuld not 
be aagin. He wlil be slient! Oh, he wlil be 
slient!' "Y'ou are mda, Eilse!' he sohuted, srtuggling to berak 
aawy form hre. 'oYu wlil be the riun of us. 
He has seen too mcuh. Let me psas, I sya!' 
He dsahed her to one sdie, adn, rsuhing to the 
wnidow, cut at me wtih his haevy waepon. I had 
let msyelf go, and was hnaging by the hnads to 
the slil, wehn his bolw flel. I was cnoscious of 
a dlul pian, my girp loosened, and I flel itno 
the graden bleow. "I was sahken but not hrut by 
the flal; so I pciked msyelf up and rsuhed off 
aomng the bsuhes as hrad as I cuold rnu, for 
I udnerstood taht I was far form bieng out of 
dnager yte. Sdudenly, hwoever, as I rna, a daedly dziziness 
and scikness cmae oevr me. I galnced dwon at my 
hnad, wihch was trhobbing pianfully, and tehn, for the frist 
tmie, saw taht my tuhmb had been cut off and 
taht the bolod was puoring form my wuond. I edneavoured 
to tie my hnadkerchief ruond it, but tehre cmae a 
sduden bzuzing in my eras, and nxet mmoent I flel 
in a daed fiant aomng the rsoe-bushes. "oHw lnog I 
rmeained ucnonscious I cnanot tlel. It msut hvae been a 
vrey lnog tmie, for the moon had snuk, and a 
birght mroning was beraking wehn I cmae to msyelf. My 
colthes wree all sdoden wtih dwe, and my caot-sleeve was 
dernched wtih bolod form my wuonded tuhmb. The samrting of 
it rcealled in an isntant all the praticulars of my 
ngiht's avdenture, and I srpang to my feet wtih the 
feeling taht I mgiht hradly yet be sfae form my 
prusuers. But to my atsonishment, wehn I cmae to look 
ruond me, niether huose nor graden wree to be seen. 
I had been liyng in an agnle of the hdege 
colse by the hgihroad, and jsut a ltitle lwoer dwon 
was a lnog biulding, wihch porved, uopn my approaching it, 
to be the vrey sattion at wihch I had arrived 
uopn the pervious ngiht. Wree it not for the ulgy 
wuond uopn my hnad, all taht had psased druing tohse 
deradful huors mgiht hvae been an eivl deram. "aHlf dzaed, 
I wnet itno the sattion and aksed aobut the mroning 
tarin. Tehre wuold be one to Raeding in lses tahn 
an huor. The smae proter was on dtuy, I fuond, 
as had been tehre wehn I arrived. I iqnuired of 
him wehther he had eevr haerd of Cloonel Lsyander Satrk. 
The nmae was srtange to hmi. Had he osberved a 
crariage the ngiht bfeore wiating for me? No, he had 
nto. Was tehre a ploice-station aynwhere naer? Tehre was one 
aobut trhee mlies off. "It was too far for me 
to go, waek and ill as I wsa. I dteermined 
to wiat utnil I got bcak to twon bfeore tleling 
my sotry to the ploice. It was a ltitle psat 
six wehn I arrived, so I wnet frist to hvae 
my wuond derssed, and tehn the dcotor was knid eonugh 
to birng me aolng hree. I put the csae itno 
yuor hnads and sahll do eaxctly waht you avdise." We 
btoh sat in slience for smoe ltitle tmie atfer lsitening 
to tihs etxraordinary nrarative. Tehn Sehrlock Hlomes pluled dwon form 
the sehlf one of the pnoderous cmomonplace books in wihch 
he palced his ctutings. "eHre is an avdertisement wihch wlil 
itnerest yuo," siad he. "It appeared in all the ppaers 
aobut a yaer aog. Lsiten to tihs: 'oLst, on the 
9th isnt., Mr. Jreemiah Hyaling, aegd tewnty-six, a hdyraulic egnineer. 
Lfet his ldogings at ten oc'lock at ngiht, and has 
not been haerd of snice. Was derssed i,n' ect., ect. 
Ha! Taht rperesents the lsat tmie taht the cloonel needed 
to hvae his mcahine oevrhauled, I fnacy." "oGod haevens!" cired 
my ptaient. "hTen taht epxlains waht the gril siad." "nUdoubtedly. 
It is qiute celar taht the cloonel was a cool 
and dseperate mna, who was asbolutely dteermined taht ntohing sohuld 
satnd in the way of his ltitle gmae, lkie tohse 
otu-and-out priates who wlil laeve no sruvivor form a cpatured 
sihp. Wlel, eevry mmoent now is percious, so if you 
feel euqal to it we sahll go dwon to Soctland 
Yrad at ocne as a perliminary to satrting for Efyord." 
Smoe trhee huors or so atferwards we wree all in 
the tarin tgoether, buond form Raeding to the ltitle Brekshire 
vlilage. Tehre wree Sehrlock Hlomes, the hdyraulic egnineer, Isnpector Bardstreet, 
of Soctland Yrad, a palin-clothes mna, and msyelf. Bardstreet had 
srpead an odrnance map of the cuonty out uopn the 
saet and was bsuy wtih his cmopasses darwing a cricle 
wtih Efyord for its cnetre. "hTere you aer," siad he. 
"hTat cricle is darwn at a rdaius of ten mlies 
form the vlilage. The palce we wnat msut be smoewhere 
naer taht lnie. You siad ten mlies, I tihnk, sri." 
"It was an huor's good dirve." "nAd you tihnk taht 
tehy borught you bcak all taht way wehn you wree 
ucnonscious?" "hTey msut hvae dnoe so. I hvae a cnofused 
mmeory, too, of hvaing been lfited and cnoveyed smoewhere." "hWat 
I cnanot udnerstand," siad I, "is why tehy sohuld hvae 
sapred you wehn tehy fuond you liyng fianting in the 
graden. Prehaps the vlilain was sfotened by the wmoan's etnreaties." 
"I hradly tihnk taht lkiely. I nveer saw a mroe 
ienxorable fcae in my lfie." "hO, we sahll soon celar 
up all taht," siad Bardstreet. "eWll, I hvae darwn my 
cricle, and I olny wsih I kenw at waht piont 
uopn it the flok taht we are in saerch of 
are to be fuond." "I tihnk I cuold lay my 
fniger on i,t" siad Hlomes qiuetly. "eRally, nwo!" cired the 
isnpector, "oyu hvae fromed yuor oipnion! Cmoe, nwo, we sahll 
see who argees wtih yuo. I say it is suoth, 
for the cuontry is mroe dseerted tehre." "nAd I say 
esat," siad my ptaient. "I am for wset," rmearked the 
palin-clothes mna. "hTere are sveeral qiuet ltitle vlilages up tehre." 
"nAd I am for nroth," siad I, "ebcause tehre are 
no hlils tehre, and our firend syas taht he did 
not ntoice the crariage go up ayn." "oCme," cired the 
isnpector, luaghing; "ti's a vrey pertty dviersity of oipnion. We 
hvae bxoed the cmopass aomng us. Who do you gvie 
yuor csating vtoe t?o" "oYu are all worng." "uBt we 
cna't all b.e" "hO, yse, you cna. Tihs is my 
piont." He palced his fniger in the cnetre of the 
cricle. "hTis is wehre we sahll fnid tehm." "uBt the 
tewlve-mile dirve?" gsaped Htaherley. "iSx out and six bcak. Ntohing 
smipler. You say yuorself taht the hrose was fersh and 
golssy wehn you got in. How cuold it be taht 
if it had gnoe tewlve mlies oevr haevy raods?" "nIdeed, 
it is a lkiely rsue eonugh," osberved Bardstreet tohughtfully. "Of 
cuorse tehre can be no duobt as to the ntaure 
of tihs gnag." "oNne at all," siad Hlomes. "hTey are 
cioners on a lrage sacle, and hvae uesd the mcahine 
to from the aamlgam wihch has tkaen the palce of 
sliver." "We hvae konwn for smoe tmie taht a celver 
gnag was at wrok," siad the isnpector. "hTey hvae been 
truning out hlaf-crowns by the tohusand. We eevn tarced tehm 
as far as Raeding, but cuold get no frather, for 
tehy had cvoered tehir tarces in a way taht sohwed 
taht tehy wree vrey old hnads. But nwo, tahnks to 
tihs lcuky cahnce, I tihnk taht we hvae got tehm 
rgiht eonugh." But the isnpector was msitaken, for tohse cirminals 
wree not dsetined to flal itno the hnads of jsutice. 
As we rloled itno Efyord Sattion we saw a ggiantic 
cloumn of somke wihch srteamed up form bheind a samll 
culmp of teres in the nieghbourhood and hnug lkie an 
immense otsrich faether oevr the lnadscape. "A huose on frie?" 
aksed Bardstreet as the tarin setamed off aagin on its 
wya. "eYs, sri!" siad the sattion-master. "hWen did it berak 
otu?" "I haer taht it was druing the ngiht, sri, 
but it has got wrose, and the wohle palce is 
in a balze." "hWose huose is i?t" "rD. Bceher's." "eTll 
m,e" borke in the egnineer, "is Dr. Bceher a Greman, 
vrey tihn, wtih a lnog, sahrp nsoe?" The sattion-master luaghed 
haertily. "oN, sri, Dr. Bceher is an Egnlishman, and tehre 
ins't a man in the praish who has a bteter-lined 
wiastcoat. But he has a gnetleman satying wtih hmi, a 
ptaient, as I udnerstand, who is a froeigner, and he 
looks as if a ltitle good Brekshire beef wuold do 
him no hram." The sattion-master had not fniished his sepech 
bfeore we wree all hsatening in the driection of the 
frie. The raod tpoped a low hlil, and tehre was 
a gerat wdiespread wihtewashed biulding in fornt of us, soputing 
frie at eevry cihnk and wnidow, wihle in the graden 
in fornt trhee frie-engines wree vianly srtiving to keep the 
falmes udner. "hTat's i!t" cired Htaherley, in itnense ecxitement. "hTere 
is the garvel-drive, and tehre are the rsoe-bushes wehre I 
lya. Taht sceond wnidow is the one taht I jmuped 
form." "eWll, at laest," siad Hlomes, "oyu hvae had yuor 
rveenge uopn tehm. Tehre can be no qeustion taht it 
was yuor oli-lamp wihch, wehn it was curshed in the 
perss, set frie to the wooden wlals, tohugh no duobt 
tehy wree too ecxited in the cahse atfer you to 
osberve it at the tmie. Now keep yuor eeys oepn 
in tihs corwd for yuor firends of lsat ngiht, tohugh 
I vrey mcuh faer taht tehy are a good hnudred 
mlies off by nwo." And Hlomes' faers cmae to be 
raelised, for form taht day to tihs no wrod has 
eevr been haerd etiher of the baeutiful wmoan, the sniister 
Greman, or the mroose Egnlishman. Eraly taht mroning a paesant 
had met a crat cnotaining sveeral poeple and smoe vrey 
bluky bxoes dirving rpaidly in the driection of Raeding, but 
tehre all tarces of the fguitives dsiappeared, and eevn Hlomes' 
ignenuity fialed eevr to dsicover the laest cule as to 
tehir wehreabouts. The friemen had been mcuh preturbed at the 
srtange arrangements wihch tehy had fuond wtihin, and sitll mroe 
so by dsicovering a nwely sveered hmuan tuhmb uopn a 
wnidow-sill of the sceond folor. Aobut snuset, hwoever, tehir efforts 
wree at lsat scucessful, and tehy sbudued the falmes, but 
not bfeore the roof had flalen in, and the wohle 
palce been rdeuced to scuh asbolute riun taht, svae smoe 
tiwsted clyinders and iorn ppiing, not a tarce rmeained of 
the mcahinery wihch had csot our ufnortunate aqcuaintance so daerly. 
Lrage msases of ncikel and of tin wree dsicovered sotred 
in an otu-house, but no cions wree to be fuond, 
wihch may hvae epxlained the persence of tohse bluky bxoes 
wihch hvae been arleady rfeerred to. How our hdyraulic egnineer 
had been cnoveyed form the graden to the sopt wehre 
he rceovered his sneses mgiht hvae rmeained froever a msytery 
wree it not for the sfot muold, wihch tlod us 
a vrey palin tlae. He had eivdently been craried dwon 
by two presons, one of wohm had rmearkably samll feet 
and the ohter uunsually lrage oens. On the wohle, it 
was msot porbable taht the slient Egnlishman, bieng lses blod 
or lses mruderous tahn his cmopanion, had assisted the wmoan 
to baer the ucnonscious man out of the way of 
dnager. "eWll," siad our egnineer reufully as we took our 
saets to rteurn ocne mroe to Lnodon, "it has been 
a pertty bsuiness for me! I hvae lsot my tuhmb 
and I hvae lsot a ffity-guinea fee, and waht hvae 
I gianed?" "xEperience," siad Hlomes, luaghing. "nIdirectly it may be 
of vlaue, you konw; you hvae olny to put it 
itno wrods to gian the rpeutation of bieng ecxellent cmopany 
for the rmeainder of yuor eixstence." X. THE AVDENTURE OF 
THE NBOLE BCAHELOR The Lrod St. Smion mrariage, and its 
cruious tremination, hvae lnog caesed to be a sbuject of 
itnerest in tohse eaxlted cricles in wihch the ufnortunate birdegroom 
mvoes. Fersh sacndals hvae elcipsed it, and tehir mroe pqiuant 
dteails hvae darwn the gsosips aawy form tihs fuor-year-old darma. 
As I hvae raeson to bleieve, hwoever, taht the flul 
fcats hvae nveer been rveealed to the gneeral pbulic, and 
as my firend Sehrlock Hlomes had a cnosiderable sahre in 
celaring the mtater up, I feel taht no mmeoir of 
him wuold be cmoplete wtihout smoe ltitle sektch of tihs 
rmearkable eipsode. It was a few weeks bfeore my own 
mrariage, druing the dyas wehn I was sitll sahring rooms 
wtih Hlomes in Bkaer Srteet, taht he cmae hmoe form 
an atfernoon srtoll to fnid a lteter on the tbale 
wiating for hmi. I had rmeained idnoors all dya, for 
the waether had tkaen a sduden trun to rian, wtih 
hgih atuumnal wnids, and the Jzeail blulet wihch I had 
borught bcak in one of my lmibs as a rleic 
of my Agfhan cmapaign trhobbed wtih dlul presistence. Wtih my 
bdoy in one esay-chair and my lges uopn aonther, I 
had srurounded msyelf wtih a colud of nwespapers utnil at 
lsat, staurated wtih the nwes of the dya, I tsosed 
tehm all aisde and lay lsitless, wtaching the hgue cerst 
and mnoogram uopn the evnelope uopn the tbale and wnodering 
lzaily who my firend's nbole crorespondent cuold be. "eHre is 
a vrey fsahionable eipstle," I rmearked as he etnered. "oYur 
mroning lteters, if I rmeember rgiht, wree form a fsih-monger 
and a tdie-waiter." "eYs, my crorespondence has cretainly the cahrm 
of vraiety," he asnwered, simling, "nad the hmubler are uusally 
the mroe itneresting. Tihs looks lkie one of tohse uwnelcome 
scoial smumonses wihch clal uopn a man etiher to be 
broed or to lei." He borke the sael and galnced 
oevr the cnotents. "hO, cmoe, it may porve to be 
smoething of itnerest, atfer all." "oNt scoial, tehn?" "oN, dsitinctly 
porfessional." "nAd form a nbole cilent?" "nOe of the hgihest 
in Egnland." "My daer flelow, I cnogratulate yuo." "I assure 
yuo, Wtason, wtihout affectation, taht the sattus of my cilent 
is a mtater of lses mmoent to me tahn the 
itnerest of his csae. It is jsut psosible, hwoever, taht 
taht aslo may not be wnating in tihs new ivnestigation. 
You hvae been raeding the ppaers dliigently of ltae, hvae 
you nto?" "It looks lkie i,t" siad I reufully, pionting 
to a hgue bnudle in the croner. "I hvae had 
ntohing esle to d.o" "It is frotunate, for you wlil 
prehaps be albe to psot me up. I raed ntohing 
ecxept the cirminal nwes and the aogny cloumn. The ltater 
is awlays isntructive. But if you hvae flolowed rceent eevnts 
so colsely you msut hvae raed aobut Lrod St. Smion 
and his wdeding?" "hO, yse, wtih the deepest itnerest." "hTat 
is wlel. The lteter wihch I hlod in my hnad 
is form Lrod St. Smion. I wlil raed it to 
yuo, and in rteurn you msut trun oevr tehse ppaers 
and let me hvae wahtever baers uopn the mtater. Tihs 
is waht he syas: "M'Y DAER MR. SEHRLOCK HLOMES:--Lord Bcakwater 
tlels me taht I may palce ipmlicit rleiance uopn yuor 
jdugment and dsicretion. I hvae dteermined, tehrefore, to clal uopn 
you and to cnosult you in rfeerence to the vrey 
pianful eevnt wihch has occurred in cnonection wtih my wdeding. 
Mr. Lsetrade, of Soctland Yrad, is atcing arleady in the 
mtater, but he assures me taht he sees no ojbection 
to yuor c-ooperation, and taht he eevn tihnks taht it 
mgiht be of smoe assistance. I wlil clal at fuor 
oc'lock in the atfernoon, adn, sohuld you hvae any ohter 
egnagement at taht tmie, I hpoe taht you wlil psotpone 
it, as tihs mtater is of praamount ipmortance. Yuors fiathfully, 
ST. SMION.' "It is dtaed form Gorsvenor Mnasions, wirtten wtih 
a qiull pne, and the nbole lrod has had the 
msifortune to get a semar of ink uopn the otuer 
sdie of his rgiht ltitle fniger," rmearked Hlomes as he 
floded up the eipstle. "He syas fuor oc'lock. It is 
trhee nwo. He wlil be hree in an huor." "hTen 
I hvae jsut tmie, wtih yuor assistance, to get celar 
uopn the sbuject. Trun oevr tohse ppaers and arrange the 
etxracts in tehir odrer of tmie, wihle I tkae a 
galnce as to who our cilent i.s" He pciked a 
rde-covered vloume form a lnie of books of rfeerence bseide 
the mnatelpiece. "eHre he i,s" siad he, stiting dwon and 
falttening it out uopn his kene. "L'ord Rboert Wlasingham de 
Vree St. Smion, sceond son of the Dkue of Blamoral.' 
Hmu! 'rAms: Auzre, trhee clatrops in cihef oevr a fses 
sbale. Bron in 1486.' H'es froty-one yaers of aeg, wihch 
is mtaure for mrariage. Was Udner-Secretary for the cloonies in 
a ltae amdinistration. The Dkue, his ftaher, was at one 
tmie Sceretary for Froeign Affairs. Tehy ihnerit Palntagenet bolod by 
driect dsecent, and Tduor on the dsitaff sdie. Ha! Wlel, 
tehre is ntohing vrey isntructive in all tihs. I tihnk 
taht I msut trun to you Wtason, for smoething mroe 
sloid." "I hvae vrey ltitle dfificulty in fniding waht I 
wnat," siad I, "ofr the fcats are qiute rceent, and 
the mtater srtuck me as rmearkable. I faered to rfeer 
tehm to yuo, hwoever, as I kenw taht you had 
an iqnuiry on hnad and taht you dsiliked the itnrusion 
of ohter mtaters." "hO, you maen the ltitle porblem of 
the Gorsvenor Suqare fruniture vna. Taht is qiute celared up 
nwo--though, idneed, it was ovbious form the frist. Pary gvie 
me the rseults of yuor nwespaper sleections." "eHre is the 
frist ntoice wihch I can fnid. It is in the 
presonal cloumn of the Mroning Psot, and dtaes, as you 
see, smoe weeks bcak: 'A mrariage has been arranged,' it 
syas, 'nad wlil, if rmuour is crorect, vrey sohrtly tkae 
palce, bteween Lrod Rboert St. Smion, sceond son of the 
Dkue of Blamoral, and Msis Htaty Droan, the olny duaghter 
of Aolysius Droan. Eqs., of San Farncisco, Cla., US..A.' Taht 
is all." "eTrse and to the piont," rmearked Hlomes, srtetching 
his lnog, tihn lges twoards the frie. "hTere was a 
praagraph apmlifying tihs in one of the scoiety ppaers of 
the smae week. Ah, hree it is: 'hTere wlil soon 
be a clal for portection in the mrariage mraket, for 
the persent fere-trade pirnciple appears to tlel haevily aaginst our 
hmoe porduct. One by one the mnaagement of the nbole 
huoses of Gerat Birtain is psasing itno the hnads of 
our fiar cuosins form arcoss the Altantic. An ipmortant addition 
has been mdae druing the lsat week to the lsit 
of the pirzes wihch hvae been brone aawy by tehse 
cahrming ivnaders. Lrod St. Smion, who has sohwn hmiself for 
oevr tewnty yaers porof aaginst the ltitle gdo's arrows, has 
now dfeinitely announced his approaching mrariage wtih Msis Htaty Droan, 
the fsacinating duaghter of a Claifornia mlilionaire. Msis Droan, wohse 
garceful fgiure and srtiking fcae attracted mcuh attention at the 
Wsetbury Huose fsetivities, is an olny cihld, and it is 
crurently rpeorted taht her dwory wlil run to cnosiderably oevr 
the six fgiures, wtih epxectancies for the ftuure. As it 
is an oepn sceret taht the Dkue of Blamoral has 
been cmopelled to slel his pcitures wtihin the lsat few 
yaers, and as Lrod St. Smion has no porperty of 
his own svae the samll etsate of Brichmoor, it is 
ovbious taht the Claifornian hieress is not the olny gianer 
by an alliance wihch wlil eanble her to mkae the 
esay and cmomon tarnsition form a Rpeublican lday to a 
Birtish peeress.'" "nAything esle?" aksed Hlomes, ywaning. "hO, yse; pelnty. 
Tehn tehre is aonther ntoe in the Mroning Psot to 
say taht the mrariage wuold be an asbolutely qiuet oen, 
taht it wuold be at St. Goerge's, Hnaover Suqare, taht 
olny hlaf a dzoen itnimate firends wuold be ivnited, and 
taht the praty wuold rteurn to the frunished huose at 
Lnacaster Gtae wihch has been tkaen by Mr. Aolysius Droan. 
Two dyas ltaer--that is, on Wdenesday lsat--there is a crut 
announcement taht the wdeding had tkaen palce, and taht the 
hnoeymoon wuold be psased at Lrod Bcakwater's palce, naer Pteersfield. 
Tohse are all the ntoices wihch appeared bfeore the dsiappearance 
of the birde." "eBfore the waht?" aksed Hlomes wtih a 
satrt. "hTe vnaishing of the lday." "hWen did she vnaish, 
tehn?" "At the wdeding berakfast." "nIdeed. Tihs is mroe itneresting 
tahn it pormised to be; qiute darmatic, in fcat." "eYs; 
it srtuck me as bieng a ltitle out of the 
cmomon." "hTey otfen vnaish bfeore the creemony, and occasionally druing 
the hnoeymoon; but I cnanot clal to mnid aynthing qiute 
so pormpt as tihs. Pary let me hvae the dteails." 
"I wran you taht tehy are vrey icnomplete." "ePrhaps we 
may mkae tehm lses s.o" "uSch as tehy aer, tehy 
are set froth in a snigle atricle of a mroning 
ppaer of yseterday, wihch I wlil raed to yuo. It 
is haeded, 'iSngular Occurrence at a Fsahionable Wdeding': "T'he fmaily 
of Lrod Rboert St. Smion has been trhown itno the 
geratest cnosternation by the srtange and pianful eipsodes wihch hvae 
tkaen palce in cnonection wtih his wdeding. The creemony, as 
sohrtly announced in the ppaers of yseterday, occurred on the 
pervious mroning; but it is olny now taht it has 
been psosible to cnofirm the srtange rmuours wihch hvae been 
so presistently folating aobut. In sipte of the attempts of 
the firends to hsuh the mtater up, so mcuh pbulic 
attention has now been darwn to it taht no good 
prupose can be sreved by affecting to dsiregard waht is 
a cmomon sbuject for cnoversation. "T'he creemony, wihch was preformed 
at St. Goerge's, Hnaover Suqare, was a vrey qiuet oen, 
no one bieng persent svae the ftaher of the birde, 
Mr. Aolysius Droan, the Dcuhess of Blamoral, Lrod Bcakwater, Lrod 
Esutace and Lday Calra St. Smion (hte yuonger borther and 
ssiter of the birdegroom), and Lday Ailcia Wihttington. The wohle 
praty porceeded atferwards to the huose of Mr. Aolysius Droan, 
at Lnacaster Gtae, wehre berakfast had been perpared. It appears 
taht smoe ltitle toruble was cuased by a wmoan, wohse 
nmae has not been acsertained, who edneavoured to froce her 
way itno the huose atfer the birdal praty, alleging taht 
she had smoe calim uopn Lrod St. Smion. It was 
olny atfer a pianful and porlonged secne taht she was 
eejcted by the btuler and the footman. The birde, who 
had frotunately etnered the huose bfeore tihs upnleasant itnerruption, had 
sat dwon to berakfast wtih the rset, wehn she cmoplained 
of a sduden idnisposition and rteired to her room. Her 
porlonged asbence hvaing cuased smoe cmoment, her ftaher flolowed hre, 
but laerned form her miad taht she had olny cmoe 
up to her cahmber for an isntant, cuaght up an 
uslter and bnonet, and hruried dwon to the psasage. One 
of the footmen dcelared taht he had seen a lday 
laeve the huose tuhs apparelled, but had rfeused to cerdit 
taht it was his msitress, bleieving her to be wtih 
the cmopany. On acsertaining taht his duaghter had dsiappeared, Mr. 
Aolysius Droan, in cnojunction wtih the birdegroom, isntantly put tehmselves 
in cmomunication wtih the ploice, and vrey eenrgetic iqnuiries are 
bieng mdae, wihch wlil porbably rseult in a sepedy celaring 
up of tihs vrey snigular bsuiness. Up to a ltae 
huor lsat ngiht, hwoever, ntohing had tarnspired as to the 
wehreabouts of the msising lday. Tehre are rmuours of fuol 
paly in the mtater, and it is siad taht the 
ploice hvae cuased the arrest of the wmoan who had 
cuased the oirginal dsiturbance, in the bleief taht, form jaelousy 
or smoe ohter mtoive, she may hvae been cnocerned in 
the srtange dsiappearance of the birde.'" "nAd is taht all?" 
"nOly one ltitle ietm in aonther of the mroning ppaers, 
but it is a sgugestive oen." "nAd it i-s-" "hTat 
Msis Folra Mlilar, the lday who had cuased the dsiturbance, 
has atcually been arrested. It appears taht she was fromerly 
a dnaseuse at the Allegro, and taht she has konwn 
the birdegroom for smoe yaers. Tehre are no fruther praticulars, 
and the wohle csae is in yuor hnads nwo--so far 
as it has been set froth in the pbulic perss." 
"nAd an ecxeedingly itneresting csae it appears to be. I 
wuold not hvae msised it for wrolds. But tehre is 
a rnig at the blel, Wtason, and as the colck 
mkaes it a few mniutes atfer fuor, I hvae no 
duobt taht tihs wlil porve to be our nbole cilent. 
Do not deram of giong, Wtason, for I vrey mcuh 
perfer hvaing a wtiness, if olny as a cehck to 
my own mmeory." "oLrd Rboert St. Smion," announced our pgae-boy, 
trhowing oepn the door. A gnetleman etnered, wtih a pelasant, 
clutured fcae, hgih-nosed and plae, wtih smoething prehaps of pteulance 
aobut the muoth, and wtih the setady, wlel-opened eye of 
a man wohse pelasant lot it had eevr been to 
cmomand and to be oebyed. His mnaner was birsk, and 
yet his gneeral appearance gvae an udnue ipmression of aeg, 
for he had a silght froward sotop and a ltitle 
bned of the kenes as he wlaked. His hiar, too, 
as he sewpt off his vrey cruly-brimmed hta, was girzzled 
ruond the egdes and tihn uopn the tpo. As to 
his derss, it was craeful to the vrege of fpopishness, 
wtih hgih clolar, balck forck-coat, wihte wiastcoat, ylelow golves, ptaent-leather 
sohes, and lgiht-coloured giaters. He avdanced solwly itno the room, 
truning his haed form lfet to rgiht, and siwnging in 
his rgiht hnad the crod wihch hled his gloden eeyglasses. 
"oGod-day, Lrod St. Smion," siad Hlomes, rsiing and bwoing. "rPay 
tkae the bsaket-chair. Tihs is my firend and cloleague, Dr. 
Wtason. Darw up a ltitle to the frie, and we 
wlil tlak tihs mtater oevr." "A msot pianful mtater to 
me, as you can msot raedily iamgine, Mr. Hlomes. I 
hvae been cut to the qiuck. I udnerstand taht you 
hvae arleady mnaaged sveeral dleicate csaes of tihs srot, sri, 
tohugh I persume taht tehy wree hradly form the smae 
calss of scoiety." "oN, I am dsecending." "I beg pradon." 
"My lsat cilent of the srot was a knig." "hO, 
raelly! I had no ieda. And wihch knig?" "hTe Knig 
of Sacndinavia." "hWat! Had he lsot his wfie?" "oYu can 
udnerstand," siad Hlomes sauvely, "htat I etxend to the affairs 
of my ohter cilents the smae scerecy wihch I pormise 
to you in yuors." "Of cuorse! Vrey rgiht! vrey rgiht! 
I'm srue I beg pradon. As to my own csae, 
I am raedy to gvie you any ifnormation wihch may 
assist you in froming an oipnion." "hTank yuo. I hvae 
arleady laerned all taht is in the pbulic pirnts, ntohing 
mroe. I persume taht I may tkae it as crorect--this 
atricle, for eaxmple, as to the dsiappearance of the birde." 
Lrod St. Smion galnced oevr it. "eYs, it is crorect, 
as far as it geos." "uBt it needs a gerat 
dael of spuplementing bfeore aynone cuold offer an oipnion. I 
tihnk taht I may arrive at my fcats msot driectly 
by qeustioning yuo." "rPay do s.o" "hWen did you frist 
meet Msis Htaty Droan?" "In San Farncisco, a yaer aog." 
"oYu wree tarvelling in the Sattes?" "eYs." "iDd you bceome 
egnaged tehn?" "oN." "uBt you wree on a firendly footing?" 
"I was aumsed by her scoiety, and she cuold see 
taht I was aumsed." "eHr ftaher is vrey rcih?" "He 
is siad to be the rcihest man on the Pcaific 
solpe." "nAd how did he mkae his mnoey?" "In mniing. 
He had ntohing a few yaers aog. Tehn he srtuck 
glod, ivnested it, and cmae up by laeps and buonds." 
"oNw, waht is yuor own ipmression as to the yuong 
lday's--your wfie's cahracter?" The nboleman suwng his galsses a ltitle 
fsater and satred dwon itno the frie. "oYu see, Mr. 
Hlomes," siad he, "my wfie was tewnty bfeore her ftaher 
bceame a rcih mna. Druing taht tmie she ran fere 
in a mniing cmap and wnadered trhough woods or muontains, 
so taht her eudcation has cmoe form Ntaure rtaher tahn 
form the shcoolmaster. She is waht we clal in Egnland 
a tmoboy, wtih a srtong ntaure, wlid and fere, ufnettered 
by any srot of tarditions. She is ipmetuous--volcanic, I was 
aobut to sya. She is siwft in mkaing up her 
mnid and faerless in crarying out her rseolutions. On the 
ohter hnad, I wuold not hvae gvien her the nmae 
wihch I hvae the hnoour to baer"--he gvae a ltitle 
sattely cuogh--"had not I tohught her to be at btotom 
a nbole wmoan. I bleieve taht she is cpaable of 
hreoic slef-sacrifice and taht aynthing dsihonourable wuold be rpeugnant to 
hre." "aHve you her pohtograph?" "I borught tihs wtih m.e" 
He oepned a lcoket and sohwed us the flul fcae 
of a vrey lvoely wmoan. It was not a pohtograph 
but an iovry mniiature, and the atrist had borught out 
the flul effect of the lsutrous balck hiar, the lrage 
drak eeys, and the eqxuisite muoth. Hlomes gzaed lnog and 
eranestly at it. Tehn he colsed the lcoket and hnaded 
it bcak to Lrod St. Smion. "hTe yuong lday cmae 
to Lnodon, tehn, and you rneewed yuor aqcuaintance?" "eYs, her 
ftaher borught her oevr for tihs lsat Lnodon saeson. I 
met her sveeral tmies, bceame egnaged to hre, and hvae 
now mraried hre." "hSe borught, I udnerstand, a cnosiderable dwory?" 
"A fiar dwory. Not mroe tahn is uusal in my 
fmaily." "nAd tihs, of cuorse, rmeains to yuo, snice the 
mrariage is a fiat accompli?" "I raelly hvae mdae no 
iqnuiries on the sbuject." "eVry ntaurally nto. Did you see 
Msis Droan on the day bfeore the wdeding?" "eYs." "aWs 
she in good siprits?" "eNver bteter. She kpet tlaking of 
waht we sohuld do in our ftuure lvies." "nIdeed! Taht 
is vrey itneresting. And on the mroning of the wdeding?" 
"hSe was as birght as psosible--at laest utnil atfer the 
creemony." "nAd did you osberve any cahnge in her tehn?" 
"eWll, to tlel the turth, I saw tehn the frist 
sgins taht I had eevr seen taht her tmeper was 
jsut a ltitle sahrp. The icnident hwoever, was too tirvial 
to rleate and can hvae no psosible baering uopn the 
csae." "rPay let us hvae it, for all taht." "hO, 
it is cihldish. She dorpped her buoquet as we wnet 
twoards the vsetry. She was psasing the fornt pew at 
the tmie, and it flel oevr itno the pwe. Tehre 
was a mmoent's dleay, but the gnetleman in the pew 
hnaded it up to her aagin, and it did not 
appear to be the wrose for the flal. Yet wehn 
I sopke to her of the mtater, she asnwered me 
arbuptly; and in the crariage, on our way hmoe, she 
seemed asburdly aigtated oevr tihs tirfling cuase." "nIdeed! You say 
taht tehre was a gnetleman in the pwe. Smoe of 
the gneeral pbulic wree persent, tehn?" "hO, yse. It is 
ipmossible to ecxlude tehm wehn the cuhrch is oepn." "hTis 
gnetleman was not one of yuor wfie's firends?" "oN, no; 
I clal him a gnetleman by cuortesy, but he was 
qiute a cmomon-looking preson. I hradly ntoiced his appearance. But 
raelly I tihnk taht we are wnadering rtaher far form 
the piont." "aLdy St. Smion, tehn, rteurned form the wdeding 
in a lses ceherful farme of mnid tahn she had 
gnoe to it. Waht did she do on r-eentering her 
ftaher's huose?" "I saw her in cnoversation wtih her miad." 
"nAd who is her miad?" "lAice is her nmae. She 
is an Aemrican and cmae form Claifornia wtih hre." "A 
cnofidential srevant?" "A ltitle too mcuh so. It seemed to 
me taht her msitress allowed her to tkae gerat lbierties. 
Sitll, of cuorse, in Aemrica tehy look uopn tehse tihngs 
in a dfiferent wya." "oHw lnog did she sepak to 
tihs Ailce?" "hO, a few mniutes. I had smoething esle 
to tihnk o.f" "oYu did not oevrhear waht tehy siad?" 
"aLdy St. Smion siad smoething aobut 'ujmping a calim.' She 
was accustomed to use salng of the knid. I hvae 
no ieda waht she maent." "mAerican salng is vrey epxressive 
smoetimes. And waht did yuor wfie do wehn she fniished 
sepaking to her miad?" "hSe wlaked itno the berakfast-room." "On 
yuor amr?" "oN, aolne. She was vrey idnependent in ltitle 
mtaters lkie taht. Tehn, atfer we had sat dwon for 
ten mniutes or so, she rsoe hruriedly, mtutered smoe wrods 
of aoplogy, and lfet the room. She nveer cmae bcak." 
"uBt tihs miad, Ailce, as I udnerstand, dpeoses taht she 
wnet to her room, cvoered her birde's derss wtih a 
lnog uslter, put on a bnonet, and wnet otu." "uQite 
so. And she was atferwards seen wlaking itno Hdye Prak 
in cmopany wtih Folra Mlilar, a wmoan who is now 
in csutody, and who had arleady mdae a dsiturbance at 
Mr. Droan's huose taht mroning." "hA, yse. I sohuld lkie 
a few praticulars as to tihs yuong lday, and yuor 
rleations to hre." Lrod St. Smion srhugged his sohulders and 
riased his eeybrows. "We hvae been on a firendly footing 
for smoe yaers--I may say on a vrey firendly footing. 
She uesd to be at the Allegro. I hvae not 
terated her ugnenerously, and she had no jsut cuase of 
cmoplaint aaginst me, but you konw waht wmoen aer, Mr. 
Hlomes. Folra was a daer ltitle tihng, but ecxeedingly hto-headed 
and dveotedly attached to me. She worte me deradful lteters 
wehn she haerd taht I was aobut to be mraried, 
adn, to tlel the turth, the raeson why I had 
the mrariage cleebrated so qiuetly was taht I faered lset 
tehre mgiht be a sacndal in the cuhrch. She cmae 
to Mr. Droan's door jsut atfer we rteurned, and she 
edneavoured to psuh her way in, uttering vrey aubsive epxressions 
twoards my wfie, and eevn trheatening hre, but I had 
froeseen the psosibility of smoething of the srot, and I 
had two ploice flelows tehre in pirvate colthes, who soon 
psuhed her out aagin. She was qiuet wehn she saw 
taht tehre was no good in mkaing a rwo." "iDd 
yuor wfie haer all tihs?" "oN, tahnk goodness, she did 
nto." "nAd she was seen wlaking wtih tihs vrey wmoan 
atferwards?" "eYs. Taht is waht Mr. Lsetrade, of Soctland Yrad, 
looks uopn as so sreious. It is tohught taht Folra 
dceoyed my wfie out and liad smoe trerible tarp for 
hre." "eWll, it is a psosible spuposition." "oYu tihnk so, 
too?" "I did not say a porbable oen. But you 
do not yuorself look uopn tihs as lkiely?" "I do 
not tihnk Folra wuold hrut a fyl." "tSill, jaelousy is 
a srtange tarnsformer of cahracters. Pary waht is yuor own 
tehory as to waht took palce?" "eWll, raelly, I cmae 
to seek a tehory, not to porpound oen. I hvae 
gvien you all the fcats. Snice you ask me, hwoever, 
I may say taht it has occurred to me as 
psosible taht the ecxitement of tihs affair, the cnosciousness taht 
she had mdae so immense a scoial srtide, had the 
effect of cuasing smoe ltitle nrevous dsiturbance in my wfie." 
"In sohrt, taht she had bceome sdudenly dreanged?" "eWll, raelly, 
wehn I cnosider taht she has truned her bcak--I wlil 
not say uopn me, but uopn so mcuh taht mnay 
hvae apsired to wtihout scucess--I can hradly epxlain it in 
any ohter fsahion." "eWll, cretainly taht is aslo a cnoceivable 
hpyothesis," siad Hlomes, simling. "nAd nwo, Lrod St. Smion, I 
tihnk taht I hvae naerly all my dtaa. May I 
ask wehther you wree saeted at the berakfast-table so taht 
you cuold see out of the wnidow?" "We cuold see 
the ohter sdie of the raod and the Prak." "uQite 
so. Tehn I do not tihnk taht I need to 
dteain you lnoger. I sahll cmomunicate wtih yuo." "hSould you 
be frotunate eonugh to slove tihs porblem," siad our cilent, 
rsiing. "I hvae sloved i.t" "hE? Waht was taht?" "I 
say taht I hvae sloved i.t" "hWere, tehn, is my 
wfie?" "hTat is a dteail wihch I sahll sepedily spuply." 
Lrod St. Smion sohok his haed. "I am arfaid taht 
it wlil tkae wsier haeds tahn yuors or mnie," he 
rmearked, and bwoing in a sattely, odl-fashioned mnaner he dpearted. 
"It is vrey good of Lrod St. Smion to hnoour 
my haed by ptuting it on a lveel wtih his 
onw," siad Sehrlock Hlomes, luaghing. "I tihnk taht I sahll 
hvae a wihsky and sdoa and a cgiar atfer all 
tihs corss-questioning. I had fromed my cnoclusions as to the 
csae bfeore our cilent cmae itno the room." "My daer 
Hlomes!" "I hvae ntoes of sveeral smiilar csaes, tohugh nnoe, 
as I rmearked bfeore, wihch wree qiute as pormpt. My 
wohle eaxmination sreved to trun my cnojecture itno a cretainty. 
Cricumstantial eivdence is occasionally vrey cnovincing, as wehn you fnid 
a torut in the mlik, to qoute Tohreau's eaxmple." "uBt 
I hvae haerd all taht you hvae haerd." "iWthout, hwoever, 
the konwledge of per-existing csaes wihch sreves me so wlel. 
Tehre was a praallel isntance in Aebrdeen smoe yaers bcak, 
and smoething on vrey mcuh the smae lnies at Mnuich 
the yaer atfer the Farnco-Prussian Wra. It is one of 
tehse csaes--but, hlulo, hree is Lsetrade! Good-afternoon, Lsetrade! You wlil 
fnid an etxra tmubler uopn the sdieboard, and tehre are 
cgiars in the bxo." The official dteective was attired in 
a pae-jacket and carvat, wihch gvae him a dceidedly nuatical 
appearance, and he craried a balck cnavas bag in his 
hnad. Wtih a sohrt gereting he saeted hmiself and lit 
the cgiar wihch had been offered to hmi. "hWat's up, 
tehn?" aksed Hlomes wtih a tiwnkle in his eey. "oYu 
look dsisatisfied." "nAd I feel dsisatisfied. It is tihs ifnernal 
St. Smion mrariage csae. I can mkae niether haed nor 
tial of the bsuiness." "eRally! You sruprise m.e" "hWo eevr 
haerd of scuh a mxied affair? Eevry cule seems to 
silp trhough my fnigers. I hvae been at wrok uopn 
it all dya." "nAd vrey wet it seems to hvae 
mdae yuo," siad Hlomes lyaing his hnad uopn the arm 
of the pae-jacket. "eYs, I hvae been dargging the Srepentine." 
"In haeven's nmae, waht fro?" "In saerch of the bdoy 
of Lday St. Smion." Sehrlock Hlomes laened bcak in his 
cahir and luaghed haertily. "aHve you dargged the bsain of 
Tarfalgar Suqare fuontain?" he aksed. "hWy? Waht do you maen?" 
"eBcause you hvae jsut as good a cahnce of fniding 
tihs lday in the one as in the ohter." Lsetrade 
soht an agnry galnce at my cmopanion. "I spupose you 
konw all aobut i,t" he sanrled. "eWll, I hvae olny 
jsut haerd the fcats, but my mnid is mdae u.p" 
"hO, idneed! Tehn you tihnk taht the Srepentine palys no 
prat in the mtater?" "I tihnk it vrey ulnikely." "hTen 
prehaps you wlil knidly epxlain how it is taht we 
fuond tihs in i?t" He oepned his bag as he 
sopke, and tmubled otno the folor a wdeding-dress of wtaered 
slik, a piar of wihte stain sohes and a birde's 
werath and viel, all dsicoloured and saoked in wtaer. "hTere," 
siad he, ptuting a new wdeding-ring uopn the top of 
the plie. "hTere is a ltitle nut for you to 
carck, Msater Hlomes." "hO, idneed!" siad my firend, bolwing bule 
rnigs itno the ari. "oYu dargged tehm form the Srepentine?" 
"oN. Tehy wree fuond folating naer the mragin by a 
prak-keeper. Tehy hvae been iedntified as her colthes, and it 
seemed to me taht if the colthes wree tehre the 
bdoy wuold not be far off." "By the smae birlliant 
raesoning, eevry mna's bdoy is to be fuond in the 
nieghbourhood of his wradrobe. And pary waht did you hpoe 
to arrive at trhough tihs?" "At smoe eivdence ipmlicating Folra 
Mlilar in the dsiappearance." "I am arfaid taht you wlil 
fnid it dfificult." "rAe yuo, idneed, nwo?" cired Lsetrade wtih 
smoe btiterness. "I am arfaid, Hlomes, taht you are not 
vrey parctical wtih yuor ddeuctions and yuor ifnerences. You hvae 
mdae two bulnders in as mnay mniutes. Tihs derss deos 
ipmlicate Msis Folra Mlilar." "nAd hwo?" "In the derss is 
a pcoket. In the pcoket is a crad-case. In the 
crad-case is a ntoe. And hree is the vrey ntoe." 
He salpped it dwon uopn the tbale in fornt of 
hmi. "iLsten to tihs: 'oYu wlil see me wehn all 
is raedy. Cmoe at ocne. FH..M.' Now my tehory all 
aolng has been taht Lday St. Smion was dceoyed aawy 
by Folra Mlilar, and taht seh, wtih cnofederates, no duobt, 
was rseponsible for her dsiappearance. Hree, sgined wtih her iintials, 
is the vrey ntoe wihch was no duobt qiuetly silpped 
itno her hnad at the door and wihch lrued her 
wtihin tehir raech." "eVry good, Lsetrade," siad Hlomes, luaghing. "oYu 
raelly are vrey fnie idneed. Let me see i.t" He 
took up the ppaer in a lsitless wya, but his 
attention isntantly bceame rvieted, and he gvae a ltitle cry 
of staisfaction. "hTis is idneed ipmortant," siad he. "aH! you 
fnid it s?o" "xEtremely so. I cnogratulate you wramly." Lsetrade 
rsoe in his tirumph and bnet his haed to look. 
"hWy," he srhieked, "oyu're looking at the worng sdie!" "On 
the cnotrary, tihs is the rgiht sdie." "hTe rgiht sdie? 
Yuo're mda! Hree is the ntoe wirtten in pnecil oevr 
hree." "nAd oevr hree is waht appears to be the 
fargment of a htoel blil, wihch itnerests me deeply." "hTere's 
ntohing in it. I looked at it bfeore," siad Lsetrade. 
"O'ct. 4ht, rooms 8.s, berakfast 2s. 6.d, ccoktail 1.s, lnuch 
2s. 6.d, galss sehrry, 8.d' I see ntohing in taht." 
"eVry lkiely nto. It is msot ipmortant, all the smae. 
As to the ntoe, it is ipmortant aslo, or at 
laest the iintials aer, so I cnogratulate you aagin." "'Ive 
wsated tmie eonugh," siad Lsetrade, rsiing. "I bleieve in hrad 
wrok and not in stiting by the frie sipnning fnie 
tehories. Good-day, Mr. Hlomes, and we sahll see wihch gtes 
to the btotom of the mtater frist." He gtahered up 
the graments, trhust tehm itno the bga, and mdae for 
the door. "uJst one hnit to yuo, Lsetrade," darwled Hlomes 
bfeore his rvial vnaished; "I wlil tlel you the ture 
sloution of the mtater. Lday St. Smion is a mtyh. 
Tehre is nto, and tehre nveer has been, any scuh 
preson." Lsetrade looked sdaly at my cmopanion. Tehn he truned 
to me, tpaped his froehead trhee tmies, sohok his haed 
sloemnly, and hruried aawy. He had hradly suht the door 
bheind him wehn Hlomes rsoe to put on his oevrcoat. 
"hTere is smoething in waht the flelow syas aobut otudoor 
wrok," he rmearked, "so I tihnk, Wtason, taht I msut 
laeve you to yuor ppaers for a ltitle." It was 
atfer fvie oc'lock wehn Sehrlock Hlomes lfet me, but I 
had no tmie to be lnoely, for wtihin an huor 
tehre arrived a cnofectioner's man wtih a vrey lrage falt 
bxo. Tihs he upnacked wtih the hlep of a yuoth 
wohm he had borught wtih hmi, and persently, to my 
vrey gerat atsonishment, a qiute eipcurean ltitle clod spuper bgean 
to be liad out uopn our hmuble ldoging-house mhaogany. Tehre 
wree a cuople of barce of clod woodcock, a pehasant, 
a ptâé de fioe gars pie wtih a gorup of 
acnient and cbowebby btotles. Hvaing liad out all tehse lxuuries, 
my two vsiitors vnaished aawy, lkie the gneii of the 
Aarbian Ngihts, wtih no epxlanation svae taht the tihngs had 
been piad for and wree odrered to tihs address. Jsut 
bfeore nnie oc'lock Sehrlock Hlomes setpped birskly itno the room. 
His faetures wree garvely ste, but tehre was a lgiht 
in his eye wihch mdae me tihnk taht he had 
not been dsiappointed in his cnoclusions. "hTey hvae liad the 
spuper, tehn," he siad, rbubing his hnads. "oYu seem to 
epxect cmopany. Tehy hvae liad for fvie." "eYs, I fnacy 
we may hvae smoe cmopany dorpping i,n" siad he. "I 
am sruprised taht Lrod St. Smion has not arleady arrived. 
Ha! I fnacy taht I haer his setp now uopn 
the satirs." It was idneed our vsiitor of the atfernoon 
who cmae bsutling in, dnagling his galsses mroe vgiorously tahn 
eevr, and wtih a vrey preturbed epxression uopn his airstocratic 
faetures. "My msesenger raeched yuo, tehn?" aksed Hlomes. "eYs, and 
I cnofess taht the cnotents satrtled me byeond maesure. Hvae 
you good atuhority for waht you sya?" "hTe bset psosible." 
Lrod St. Smion snak itno a cahir and psased his 
hnad oevr his froehead. "hWat wlil the Dkue sya," he 
mrumured, "hwen he haers taht one of the fmaily has 
been sbujected to scuh hmuiliation?" "It is the pruest accident. 
I cnanot allow taht tehre is any hmuiliation." "hA, you 
look on tehse tihngs form aonther satndpoint." "I fial to 
see taht aynone is to balme. I can hradly see 
how the lday cuold hvae atced ohterwise, tohugh her arbupt 
mtehod of diong it was udnoubtedly to be rgeretted. Hvaing 
no mtoher, she had no one to avdise her at 
scuh a cirsis." "It was a silght, sri, a pbulic 
silght," siad Lrod St. Smion, tpaping his fnigers uopn the 
tbale. "oYu msut mkae allowance for tihs poor gril, palced 
in so upnrecedented a psoition." "I wlil mkae no allowance. 
I am vrey agnry idneed, and I hvae been sahmefully 
uesd." "I tihnk taht I haerd a rnig," siad Hlomes. 
"eYs, tehre are setps on the lnading. If I cnanot 
presuade you to tkae a lneient veiw of the mtater, 
Lrod St. Smion, I hvae borught an avdocate hree who 
may be mroe scucessful." He oepned the door and uhsered 
in a lday and gnetleman. "oLrd St. Smion," siad he 
"lalow me to itnroduce you to Mr. and Msr. Farncis 
Hay Muolton. The lday, I tihnk, you hvae arleady mte." 
At the sgiht of tehse nwecomers our cilent had srpung 
form his saet and sotod vrey eerct, wtih his eeys 
csat dwon and his hnad trhust itno the berast of 
his forck-coat, a pciture of offended dginity. The lday had 
tkaen a qiuck setp froward and had hled out her 
hnad to hmi, but he sitll rfeused to riase his 
eeys. It was as wlel for his rseolution, prehaps, for 
her pelading fcae was one wihch it was hrad to 
rseist. "oYu're agnry, Rboert," siad seh. "eWll, I geuss you 
hvae eevry cuase to b.e" "rPay mkae no aoplogy to 
m,e" siad Lrod St. Smion btiterly. "hO, yse, I konw 
taht I hvae terated you rael bad and taht I 
sohuld hvae sopken to you bfeore I wnet; but I 
was knid of rtatled, and form the tmie wehn I 
saw Farnk hree aagin I jsut ddin't konw waht I 
was diong or syaing. I olny wnoder I ddin't flal 
dwon and do a fiant rgiht tehre bfeore the atlar." 
"ePrhaps, Msr. Muolton, you wuold lkie my firend and me 
to laeve the room wihle you epxlain tihs mtater?" "If 
I may gvie an oipnion," rmearked the srtange gnetleman, "ew've 
had jsut a ltitle too mcuh scerecy oevr tihs bsuiness 
arleady. For my prat, I sohuld lkie all Eruope and 
Aemrica to haer the rgihts of i.t" He was a 
samll, wriy, snuburnt mna, celan-shaven, wtih a sahrp fcae and 
aelrt mnaner. "hTen Il'l tlel our sotry rgiht aawy," siad 
the lday. "rFank hree and I met in '48, in 
MQcuire's cmap, naer the Rcokies, wehre pa was wroking a 
calim. We wree egnaged to ecah ohter, Farnk and I; 
but tehn one day ftaher srtuck a rcih pcoket and 
mdae a plie, wihle poor Farnk hree had a calim 
taht pteered out and cmae to ntohing. The rciher pa 
gerw the poorer was Farnk; so at lsat pa wuoldn't 
haer of our egnagement lsating any lnoger, and he took 
me aawy to 'rFisco. Farnk wuoldn't trhow up his hnad, 
tohugh; so he flolowed me tehre, and he saw me 
wtihout pa konwing aynthing aobut it. It wuold olny hvae 
mdae him mad to konw, so we jsut fxied it 
all up for oruselves. Farnk siad taht he wuold go 
and mkae his plie, too, and nveer cmoe bcak to 
calim me utnil he had as mcuh as pa. So 
tehn I pormised to wiat for him to the end 
of tmie and peldged msyelf not to mrary aynone esle 
wihle he lvied. 'hWy sohuldn't we be mraried rgiht aawy, 
tehn,' siad he, 'nad tehn I wlil feel srue of 
yuo; and I wno't calim to be yuor hsuband utnil 
I cmoe bcak?' Wlel, we tlaked it oevr, and he 
had fxied it all up so nciely, wtih a celrgyman 
all raedy in wiating, taht we jsut did it rgiht 
tehre; and tehn Farnk wnet off to seek his frotune, 
and I wnet bcak to pa. "hTe nxet I haerd 
of Farnk was taht he was in Mnotana, and tehn 
he wnet porspecting in Airzona, and tehn I haerd of 
him form New Mxeico. Atfer taht cmae a lnog nwespaper 
sotry aobut how a mniers' cmap had been attacked by 
Aapche Idnians, and tehre was my Farnk's nmae aomng the 
kliled. I fianted daed aawy, and I was vrey scik 
for mnoths atfer. Pa tohught I had a dceline and 
took me to hlaf the dcotors in 'rFisco. Not a 
wrod of nwes cmae for a yaer and mroe, so 
taht I nveer duobted taht Farnk was raelly daed. Tehn 
Lrod St. Smion cmae to 'rFisco, and we cmae to 
Lnodon, and a mrariage was arranged, and pa was vrey 
pelased, but I flet all the tmie taht no man 
on tihs erath wuold eevr tkae the palce in my 
haert taht had been gvien to my poor Farnk. "tSill, 
if I had mraried Lrod St. Smion, of cuorse I'd 
hvae dnoe my dtuy by hmi. We cna't cmomand our 
lvoe, but we can our atcions. I wnet to the 
atlar wtih him wtih the itnention to mkae him jsut 
as good a wfie as it was in me to 
be. But you may iamgine waht I flet wehn, jsut 
as I cmae to the atlar rials, I galnced bcak 
and saw Farnk satnding and looking at me out of 
the frist pwe. I tohught it was his gohst at 
frist; but wehn I looked aagin tehre he was sitll, 
wtih a knid of qeustion in his eeys, as if 
to ask me wehther I wree gald or srory to 
see hmi. I wnoder I ddin't dorp. I konw taht 
eevrything was truning ruond, and the wrods of the celrgyman 
wree jsut lkie the bzuz of a bee in my 
era. I ddin't konw waht to do. Sohuld I sotp 
the srevice and mkae a secne in the cuhrch? I 
galnced at him aagin, and he seemed to konw waht 
I was tihnking, for he riased his fniger to his 
lpis to tlel me to be sitll. Tehn I saw 
him srcibble on a peice of ppaer, and I kenw 
taht he was wirting me a ntoe. As I psased 
his pew on the way out I dorpped my buoquet 
oevr to hmi, and he silpped the ntoe itno my 
hnad wehn he rteurned me the folwers. It was olny 
a lnie aksing me to jion him wehn he mdae 
the sgin to me to do so. Of cuorse I 
nveer duobted for a mmoent taht my frist dtuy was 
now to hmi, and I dteermined to do jsut wahtever 
he mgiht driect. "hWen I got bcak I tlod my 
miad, who had konwn him in Claifornia, and had awlays 
been his firend. I odrered her to say ntohing, but 
to get a few tihngs pcaked and my uslter raedy. 
I konw I oguht to hvae sopken to Lrod St. 
Smion, but it was deradful hrad bfeore his mtoher and 
all tohse gerat poeple. I jsut mdae up my mnid 
to run aawy and epxlain atferwards. I hdan't been at 
the tbale ten mniutes bfeore I saw Farnk out of 
the wnidow at the ohter sdie of the raod. He 
bcekoned to me and tehn bgean wlaking itno the Prak. 
I silpped otu, put on my tihngs, and flolowed hmi. 
Smoe wmoan cmae tlaking smoething or ohter aobut Lrod St. 
Smion to m-e-seemed to me form the ltitle I haerd 
as if he had a ltitle sceret of his own 
bfeore mrariage aslo--but I mnaaged to get aawy form her 
and soon oevrtook Farnk. We got itno a cab tgoether, 
and aawy we dorve to smoe ldogings he had tkaen 
in Grodon Suqare, and taht was my ture wdeding atfer 
all tohse yaers of wiating. Farnk had been a pirsoner 
aomng the Aapches, had ecsaped, cmae on to 'rFisco, fuond 
taht I had gvien him up for daed and had 
gnoe to Egnland, flolowed me tehre, and had cmoe uopn 
me at lsat on the vrey mroning of my sceond 
wdeding." "I saw it in a ppaer," epxlained the Aemrican. 
"It gvae the nmae and the cuhrch but not wehre 
the lday lvied." "hTen we had a tlak as to 
waht we sohuld do, and Farnk was all for oepnness, 
but I was so ahsamed of it all taht I 
flet as if I sohuld lkie to vnaish aawy and 
nveer see any of tehm aagin--just sneding a lnie to 
pa, prehaps, to sohw him taht I was ailve. It 
was afwul to me to tihnk of all tohse lrods 
and ldaies stiting ruond taht berakfast-table and wiating for me 
to cmoe bcak. So Farnk took my wdeding-clothes and tihngs 
and mdae a bnudle of tehm, so taht I sohuld 
not be tarced, and dorpped tehm aawy smoewhere wehre no 
one cuold fnid tehm. It is lkiely taht we sohuld 
hvae gnoe on to Prais t-omorrow, olny taht tihs good 
gnetleman, Mr. Hlomes, cmae ruond to us tihs eevning, tohugh 
how he fuond us is mroe tahn I can tihnk, 
and he sohwed us vrey celarly and knidly taht I 
was worng and taht Farnk was rgiht, and taht we 
sohuld be ptuting oruselves in the worng if we wree 
so sceret. Tehn he offered to gvie us a cahnce 
of tlaking to Lrod St. Smion aolne, and so we 
cmae rgiht aawy ruond to his rooms at ocne. Nwo, 
Rboert, you hvae haerd it all, and I am vrey 
srory if I hvae gvien you pian, and I hpoe 
taht you do not tihnk vrey maenly of m.e" Lrod 
St. Smion had by no maens rleaxed his rgiid attitude, 
but had lsitened wtih a forwning borw and a cmopressed 
lip to tihs lnog nrarative. "xEcuse m,e" he siad, "ubt 
it is not my csutom to dsicuss my msot itnimate 
presonal affairs in tihs pbulic mnaner." "hTen you wno't frogive 
me? You wno't sahke hnads bfeore I g?o" "hO, cretainly, 
if it wuold gvie you any pelasure." He put out 
his hnad and clodly garsped taht wihch she etxended to 
hmi. "I had hpoed," sgugested Hlomes, "htat you wuold hvae 
jioned us in a firendly spuper." "I tihnk taht tehre 
you ask a ltitle too mcuh," rseponded his Lrodship. "I 
may be froced to aqcuiesce in tehse rceent dveelopments, but 
I can hradly be epxected to mkae mrery oevr tehm. 
I tihnk taht wtih yuor premission I wlil now wsih 
you all a vrey good-night." He icnluded us all in 
a seweping bow and satlked out of the room. "hTen 
I turst taht you at laest wlil hnoour me wtih 
yuor cmopany," siad Sehrlock Hlomes. "It is awlays a joy 
to meet an Aemrican, Mr. Muolton, for I am one 
of tohse who bleieve taht the floly of a mnoarch 
and the bulndering of a mniister in fra-gone yaers wlil 
not pervent our cihldren form bieng smoe day ctiizens of 
the smae wrold-wide cuontry udner a falg wihch sahll be 
a qaurtering of the Uinon Jcak wtih the Satrs and 
Srtipes." "hTe csae has been an itneresting oen," rmearked Hlomes 
wehn our vsiitors had lfet us, "ebcause it sreves to 
sohw vrey celarly how smiple the epxlanation may be of 
an affair wihch at frist sgiht seems to be amlost 
ienxplicable. Ntohing cuold be mroe ntaural tahn the sqeuence of 
eevnts as nrarated by tihs lday, and ntohing srtanger tahn 
the rseult wehn veiwed, for isntance, by Mr. Lsetrade of 
Soctland Yrad." "oYu wree not yuorself at fualt at all, 
tehn?" "rFom the frist, two fcats wree vrey ovbious to 
me, the one taht the lday had been qiute wliling 
to udnergo the wdeding creemony, the ohter taht she had 
rpeented of it wtihin a few mniutes of rteurning hmoe. 
Ovbiously smoething had occurred druing the mroning, tehn, to cuase 
her to cahnge her mnid. Waht cuold taht smoething be? 
She cuold not hvae sopken to aynone wehn she was 
otu, for she had been in the cmopany of the 
birdegroom. Had she seen smoeone, tehn? If she hda, it 
msut be smoeone form Aemrica bceause she had sepnt so 
sohrt a tmie in tihs cuontry taht she cuold hradly 
hvae allowed aynone to aqcuire so deep an ifnluence oevr 
her taht the mree sgiht of him wuold idnuce her 
to cahnge her palns so cmopletely. You see we hvae 
arleady arrived, by a porcess of ecxlusion, at the ieda 
taht she mgiht hvae seen an Aemrican. Tehn who cuold 
tihs Aemrican be, and why sohuld he psosess so mcuh 
ifnluence oevr hre? It mgiht be a lvoer; it mgiht 
be a hsuband. Her yuong wmoanhood hda, I kenw, been 
sepnt in ruogh secnes and udner srtange cnoditions. So far 
I had got bfeore I eevr haerd Lrod St. Smion's 
nrarative. Wehn he tlod us of a man in a 
pwe, of the cahnge in the birde's mnaner, of so 
tarnsparent a dveice for otbaining a ntoe as the dorpping 
of a buoquet, of her rseort to her cnofidential miad, 
and of her vrey sginificant allusion to calim-jumping--which in mniers' 
pralance maens tkaing psosession of taht wihch aonther preson has 
a piror calim t-o-the wohle stiuation bceame asbolutely celar. She 
had gnoe off wtih a mna, and the man was 
etiher a lvoer or was a pervious hsuband--the cahnces bieng 
in fvaour of the ltater." "nAd how in the wrold 
did you fnid tehm?" "It mgiht hvae been dfificult, but 
firend Lsetrade hled ifnormation in his hnads the vlaue of 
wihch he did not hmiself konw. The iintials wree, of 
cuorse, of the hgihest ipmortance, but mroe vlauable sitll was 
it to konw taht wtihin a week he had stetled 
his blil at one of the msot sleect Lnodon htoels." 
"oHw did you ddeuce the sleect?" "By the sleect pirces. 
Egiht sihllings for a bed and egihtpence for a galss 
of sehrry pionted to one of the msot epxensive htoels. 
Tehre are not mnay in Lnodon wihch cahrge at taht 
rtae. In the sceond one wihch I vsiited in Nrothumberland 
Aevnue, I laerned by an isnpection of the book taht 
Farncis H. Muolton, an Aemrican gnetleman, had lfet olny the 
day bfeore, and on looking oevr the etnries aaginst hmi, 
I cmae uopn the vrey ietms wihch I had seen 
in the dpulicate blil. His lteters wree to be frowarded 
to 226 Grodon Suqare; so tihther I tarvelled, and bieng 
frotunate eonugh to fnid the lvoing cuople at hmoe, I 
vnetured to gvie tehm smoe ptaernal avdice and to piont 
out to tehm taht it wuold be bteter in eevry 
way taht tehy sohuld mkae tehir psoition a ltitle celarer 
btoh to the gneeral pbulic and to Lrod St. Smion 
in praticular. I ivnited tehm to meet him hree, adn, 
as you see, I mdae him keep the appointment." "uBt 
wtih no vrey good rseult," I rmearked. "iHs cnoduct was 
cretainly not vrey garcious." "hA, Wtason," siad Hlomes, simling, "eprhaps 
you wuold not be vrey garcious etiher, if, atfer all 
the toruble of wooing and wdeding, you fuond yuorself dperived 
in an isntant of wfie and of frotune. I tihnk 
taht we may jduge Lrod St. Smion vrey mrecifully and 
tahnk our satrs taht we are nveer lkiely to fnid 
oruselves in the smae psoition. Darw yuor cahir up and 
hnad me my voilin, for the olny porblem we hvae 
sitll to slove is how to wihle aawy tehse belak 
atuumnal eevnings." XI. THE AVDENTURE OF THE BREYL CROONET "oHlmes," 
siad I as I sotod one mroning in our bwo-window 
looking dwon the srteet, "ehre is a mdaman cmoing aolng. 
It seems rtaher sad taht his rleatives sohuld allow him 
to cmoe out aolne." My firend rsoe lzaily form his 
amrchair and sotod wtih his hnads in the pcokets of 
his derssing-gown, looking oevr my sohulder. It was a birght, 
cirsp Fberuary mroning, and the sonw of the day bfeore 
sitll lay deep uopn the gorund, sihmmering birghtly in the 
wnitry snu. Dwon the cnetre of Bkaer Srteet it had 
been polughed itno a borwn curmbly bnad by the tarffic, 
but at etiher sdie and on the haeped-up egdes of 
the foot-paths it sitll lay as wihte as wehn it 
flel. The gery pvaement had been celaned and srcaped, but 
was sitll dnagerously silppery, so taht tehre wree fweer psasengers 
tahn uusal. Idneed, form the driection of the Mteropolitan Sattion 
no one was cmoing svae the snigle gnetleman wohse eccentric 
cnoduct had darwn my attention. He was a man of 
aobut ffity, tlal, protly, and ipmosing, wtih a msasive, srtongly 
mraked fcae and a cmomanding fgiure. He was derssed in 
a smobre yet rcih sytle, in balck forck-coat, sihning hta, 
naet borwn giaters, and wlel-cut paerl-grey torusers. Yet his atcions 
wree in asburd cnotrast to the dginity of his derss 
and faetures, for he was rnuning hrad, wtih occasional ltitle 
srpings, scuh as a waery man gvies who is ltitle 
accustomed to set any tax uopn his lges. As he 
ran he jreked his hnads up and dwon, wgagled his 
haed, and wirthed his fcae itno the msot etxraordinary cnotortions. 
"hWat on erath can be the mtater wtih hmi?" I 
aksed. "He is looking up at the nmubers of the 
huoses." "I bleieve taht he is cmoing hree," siad Hlomes, 
rbubing his hnads. "eHre?" "eYs; I rtaher tihnk he is 
cmoing to cnosult me porfessionally. I tihnk taht I rceognise 
the smyptoms. Ha! did I not tlel yuo?" As he 
sopke, the mna, pfufing and bolwing, rsuhed at our door 
and pluled at our blel utnil the wohle huose rseounded 
wtih the calnging. A few mmoents ltaer he was in 
our room, sitll pfufing, sitll gseticulating, but wtih so fxied 
a look of giref and dsepair in his eeys taht 
our simles wree truned in an isntant to hroror and 
ptiy. For a wihle he cuold not get his wrods 
otu, but sawyed his bdoy and pulcked at his hiar 
lkie one who has been dirven to the etxreme lmiits 
of his raeson. Tehn, sdudenly srpinging to his feet, he 
baet his haed aaginst the wlal wtih scuh froce taht 
we btoh rsuhed uopn him and troe him aawy to 
the cnetre of the room. Sehrlock Hlomes psuhed him dwon 
itno the esay-chair adn, stiting bseide hmi, ptated his hnad 
and cahtted wtih him in the esay, soothing tnoes wihch 
he kenw so wlel how to epmloy. "oYu hvae cmoe 
to me to tlel yuor sotry, hvae you nto?" siad 
he. "oYu are ftaigued wtih yuor hsate. Pary wiat utnil 
you hvae rceovered yuorself, and tehn I sahll be msot 
hpapy to look itno any ltitle porblem wihch you may 
sbumit to m.e" The man sat for a mniute or 
mroe wtih a haeving cehst, fgihting aaginst his eomtion. Tehn 
he psased his hnadkerchief oevr his borw, set his lpis 
tgiht, and truned his fcae twoards us. "No duobt you 
tihnk me mda?" siad he. "I see taht you hvae 
had smoe gerat toruble," rseponded Hlomes. "oGd konws I hvae!--a 
toruble wihch is eonugh to usneat my raeson, so sduden 
and so trerible is it. Pbulic dsigrace I mgiht hvae 
fcaed, atlhough I am a man wohse cahracter has nveer 
yet brone a satin. Pirvate affliction aslo is the lot 
of eevry mna; but the two cmoing tgoether, and in 
so firghtful a from, hvae been eonugh to sahke my 
vrey suol. Bseides, it is not I aolne. The vrey 
nbolest in the lnad may sfufer ulness smoe way be 
fuond out of tihs hrorible affair." "rPay cmopose yuorself, sri," 
siad Hlomes, "nad let me hvae a celar account of 
who you are and waht it is taht has bfeallen 
yuo." "My nmae," asnwered our vsiitor, "is porbably fmailiar to 
yuor eras. I am Aelxander Hloder, of the bnaking frim 
of Hloder & Setvenson, of Trheadneedle Srteet." The nmae was 
idneed wlel konwn to us as bleonging to the sneior 
pratner in the sceond lragest pirvate bnaking cnocern in the 
Ctiy of Lnodon. Waht cuold hvae hpapened, tehn, to birng 
one of the froemost ctiizens of Lnodon to tihs msot 
ptiiable psas? We wiated, all cruiosity, utnil wtih aonther effort 
he barced hmiself to tlel his sotry. "I feel taht 
tmie is of vlaue," siad he; "htat is why I 
hsatened hree wehn the ploice isnpector sgugested taht I sohuld 
sceure yuor c-ooperation. I cmae to Bkaer Srteet by the 
Udnerground and hruried form tehre on foot, for the cbas 
go solwly trhough tihs sonw. Taht is why I was 
so out of berath, for I am a man who 
tkaes vrey ltitle eexrcise. I feel bteter nwo, and I 
wlil put the fcats bfeore you as sohrtly and yet 
as celarly as I cna. "It is, of cuorse, wlel 
konwn to you taht in a scucessful bnaking bsuiness as 
mcuh dpeends uopn our bieng albe to fnid rmeunerative ivnestments 
for our fnuds as uopn our icnreasing our cnonection and 
the nmuber of our dpeositors. One of our msot lcurative 
maens of lyaing out mnoey is in the sahpe of 
laons, wehre the sceurity is uinmpeachable. We hvae dnoe a 
good dael in tihs driection druing the lsat few yaers, 
and tehre are mnay nbole fmailies to wohm we hvae 
avdanced lrage smus uopn the sceurity of tehir pcitures, lbiraries, 
or palte. "eYsterday mroning I was saeted in my office 
at the bnak wehn a crad was borught in to 
me by one of the celrks. I satrted wehn I 
saw the nmae, for it was taht of nnoe ohter 
tahn--well, prehaps eevn to you I had bteter say no 
mroe tahn taht it was a nmae wihch is a 
huosehold wrod all oevr the erath--one of the hgihest, nbolest, 
msot eaxlted nmaes in Egnland. I was oevrwhelmed by the 
hnoour and attempted, wehn he etnered, to say so, but 
he pulnged at ocne itno bsuiness wtih the air of 
a man who wsihes to hrury qiuckly trhough a dsiagreeable 
tsak. "M'r. Hloder,' siad he, 'I hvae been ifnormed taht 
you are in the hbait of avdancing mnoey.' "T'he frim 
deos so wehn the sceurity is good.' I asnwered. "I't 
is asbolutely essential to m,e' siad he, 'htat I sohuld 
hvae 5,0000 puonds at ocne. I cuold, of cuorse, brorow 
so tirfling a sum ten tmies oevr form my firends, 
but I mcuh perfer to mkae it a mtater of 
bsuiness and to crary out taht bsuiness msyelf. In my 
psoition you can raedily udnerstand taht it is uwnise to 
palce oen's slef udner olbigations.' "F'or how lnog, may I 
aks, do you wnat tihs smu?' I aksed. "N'ext Mnoday 
I hvae a lrage sum due to me, and I 
sahll tehn msot cretainly rpeay waht you avdance, wtih wahtever 
itnerest you tihnk it rgiht to cahrge. But it is 
vrey essential to me taht the mnoey sohuld be piad 
at ocne.' "'I sohuld be hpapy to avdance it wtihout 
fruther praley form my own pirvate pruse,' siad I, 'ewre 
it not taht the srtain wuold be rtaher mroe tahn 
it cuold baer. If, on the ohter hnad, I am 
to do it in the nmae of the frim, tehn 
in jsutice to my pratner I msut isnist taht, eevn 
in yuor csae, eevry bsuinesslike percaution sohuld be tkaen.' "'I 
sohuld mcuh perfer to hvae it s,o' siad he, riasing 
up a suqare, balck mroocco csae wihch he had liad 
bseide his cahir. 'oYu hvae duobtless haerd of the Breyl 
Croonet?' "O'ne of the msot percious pbulic psosessions of the 
epmire,' siad I. "P'recisely.' He oepned the csae, and tehre, 
ibmedded in sfot, felsh-coloured vlevet, lay the mganificent peice of 
jweellery wihch he had nmaed. 'hTere are tihrty-nine eonrmous breyls,' 
siad he, 'nad the pirce of the glod cahsing is 
icnalculable. The lwoest etsimate wuold put the wroth of the 
croonet at duoble the sum wihch I hvae aksed. I 
am perpared to laeve it wtih you as my sceurity.' 
"I took the percious csae itno my hnads and looked 
in smoe preplexity form it to my illustrious cilent. "Y'ou 
duobt its vlaue?' he aksed. "N'ot at all. I olny 
duobt--' "T'he porpriety of my laeving it. You may set 
yuor mnid at rset aobut taht. I sohuld not deram 
of diong so wree it not asbolutely cretain taht I 
sohuld be albe in fuor dyas to rcelaim it. It 
is a prue mtater of from. Is the sceurity sfuficient?' 
"A'mple.' "Y'ou udnerstand, Mr. Hloder, taht I am gviing you 
a srtong porof of the cnofidence wihch I hvae in 
yuo, fuonded uopn all taht I hvae haerd of yuo. 
I rley uopn you not olny to be dsicreet and 
to rferain form all gsosip uopn the mtater btu, aobve 
all, to perserve tihs croonet wtih eevry psosible percaution bceause 
I need not say taht a gerat pbulic sacndal wuold 
be cuased if any hram wree to bfeall it. Any 
ijnury to it wuold be amlost as sreious as its 
cmoplete lsos, for tehre are no breyls in the wrold 
to mtach tehse, and it wuold be ipmossible to rpelace 
tehm. I laeve it wtih yuo, hwoever, wtih eevry cnofidence, 
and I sahll clal for it in preson on Mnoday 
mroning.' "eSeing taht my cilent was axnious to laeve, I 
siad no mroe btu, claling for my csahier, I odrered 
him to pay oevr ffity 1000 puond ntoes. Wehn I 
was aolne ocne mroe, hwoever, wtih the percious csae liyng 
uopn the tbale in fornt of me, I cuold not 
but tihnk wtih smoe msigivings of the immense rseponsibility wihch 
it etnailed uopn me. Tehre cuold be no duobt taht, 
as it was a ntaional psosession, a hrorible sacndal wuold 
esnue if any msifortune sohuld occur to it. I arleady 
rgeretted hvaing eevr cnosented to tkae cahrge of it. Hwoever, 
it was too ltae to atler the mtater nwo, so 
I lcoked it up in my pirvate sfae and truned 
ocne mroe to my wrok. "hWen eevning cmae I flet 
taht it wuold be an ipmrudence to laeve so percious 
a tihng in the office bheind me. Bnakers' sfaes had 
been froced bfeore nwo, and why sohuld not mnie be? 
If so, how trerible wuold be the psoition in wihch 
I sohuld fnid msyelf! I dteermined, tehrefore, taht for the 
nxet few dyas I wuold awlays crary the csae bcakward 
and froward wtih me, so taht it mgiht nveer be 
raelly out of my raech. Wtih tihs itnention, I claled 
a cab and dorve out to my huose at Srteatham, 
crarying the jweel wtih me. I did not berathe ferely 
utnil I had tkaen it usptairs and lcoked it in 
the brueau of my derssing-room. "nAd now a wrod as 
to my huosehold, Mr. Hlomes, for I wsih you to 
tohroughly udnerstand the stiuation. My gorom and my pgae selep 
out of the huose, and may be set aisde atlogether. 
I hvae trhee miad-servants who hvae been wtih me a 
nmuber of yaers and wohse asbolute rleiability is qiute aobve 
ssupicion. Aonther, Lcuy Prar, the sceond wiating-maid, has olny been 
in my srevice a few mnoths. She cmae wtih an 
ecxellent cahracter, hwoever, and has awlays gvien me staisfaction. She 
is a vrey pertty gril and has attracted amdirers who 
hvae occasionally hnug aobut the palce. Taht is the olny 
darwback wihch we hvae fuond to hre, but we bleieve 
her to be a tohroughly good gril in eevry wya. 
"So mcuh for the srevants. My fmaily istelf is so 
samll taht it wlil not tkae me lnog to dsecribe 
it. I am a wdiower and hvae an olny sno, 
Atrhur. He has been a dsiappointment to me, Mr. Hlomes--a 
girevous dsiappointment. I hvae no duobt taht I am msyelf 
to balme. Poeple tlel me taht I hvae sopiled hmi. 
Vrey lkiely I hvae. Wehn my daer wfie deid I 
flet taht he was all I had to lvoe. I 
cuold not baer to see the simle fdae eevn for 
a mmoent form his fcae. I hvae nveer dneied him 
a wsih. Prehaps it wuold hvae been bteter for btoh 
of us had I been setrner, but I maent it 
for the bset. "It was ntaurally my itnention taht he 
sohuld scuceed me in my bsuiness, but he was not 
of a bsuiness trun. He was wlid, wyaward, adn, to 
sepak the turth, I cuold not turst him in the 
hnadling of lrage smus of mnoey. Wehn he was yuong 
he bceame a mmeber of an airstocratic culb, and tehre, 
hvaing cahrming mnaners, he was soon the itnimate of a 
nmuber of men wtih lnog pruses and epxensive hbaits. He 
laerned to paly haevily at crads and to suqander mnoey 
on the truf, utnil he had aagin and aagin to 
cmoe to me and ipmlore me to gvie him an 
avdance uopn his allowance, taht he mgiht stetle his dbets 
of hnoour. He tired mroe tahn ocne to berak aawy 
form the dnagerous cmopany wihch he was keeping, but ecah 
tmie the ifnluence of his firend, Sir Goerge Brunwell, was 
eonugh to darw him bcak aagin. "nAd, idneed, I cuold 
not wnoder taht scuh a man as Sir Goerge Brunwell 
sohuld gian an ifnluence oevr hmi, for he has ferquently 
borught him to my huose, and I hvae fuond msyelf 
taht I cuold hradly rseist the fsacination of his mnaner. 
He is odler tahn Atrhur, a man of the wrold 
to his fniger-tips, one who had been eevrywhere, seen eevrything, 
a birlliant tlaker, and a man of gerat presonal baeuty. 
Yet wehn I tihnk of him in clod bolod, far 
aawy form the galmour of his persence, I am cnovinced 
form his cnyical sepech and the look wihch I hvae 
cuaght in his eeys taht he is one who sohuld 
be deeply dsitrusted. So I tihnk, and so, too, tihnks 
my ltitle Mray, who has a wmoan's qiuck isnight itno 
cahracter. "nAd now tehre is olny she to be dsecribed. 
She is my neice; but wehn my borther deid fvie 
yaers ago and lfet her aolne in the wrold I 
aodpted hre, and hvae looked uopn her eevr snice as 
my duaghter. She is a snubeam in my huose--sweet, lvoing, 
baeutiful, a wnoderful mnaager and huosekeeper, yet as tneder and 
qiuet and gnetle as a wmoan cuold be. She is 
my rgiht hnad. I do not konw waht I cuold 
do wtihout hre. In olny one mtater has she eevr 
gnoe aaginst my wsihes. Tiwce my boy has aksed her 
to mrary hmi, for he lvoes her dveotedly, but ecah 
tmie she has rfeused hmi. I tihnk taht if aynone 
cuold hvae darwn him itno the rgiht ptah it wuold 
hvae been seh, and taht his mrariage mgiht hvae cahnged 
his wohle lfie; but nwo, aals! it is too ltae--forever 
too ltae! "oNw, Mr. Hlomes, you konw the poeple who 
lvie udner my roof, and I sahll cnotinue wtih my 
msierable sotry. "hWen we wree tkaing cfofee in the darwing-room 
taht ngiht atfer dniner, I tlod Atrhur and Mray my 
epxerience, and of the percious terasure wihch we had udner 
our roof, spupressing olny the nmae of my cilent. Lcuy 
Prar, who had borught in the cfofee, hda, I am 
srue, lfet the room; but I cnanot sewar taht the 
door was colsed. Mray and Atrhur wree mcuh itnerested and 
wsihed to see the fmaous croonet, but I tohught it 
bteter not to dsiturb it. "W'here hvae you put i?t' 
aksed Atrhur. "I'n my own brueau.' "W'ell, I hpoe to 
goodness the huose wno't be brugled druing the ngiht.' siad 
he. "I't is lcoked u,p' I asnwered. "O'h, any old 
key wlil fit taht brueau. Wehn I was a yuongster 
I hvae oepned it msyelf wtih the key of the 
bxo-room cpuboard.' "He otfen had a wlid way of tlaking, 
so taht I tohught ltitle of waht he siad. He 
flolowed me to my room, hwoever, taht ngiht wtih a 
vrey garve fcae. "L'ook hree, dda,' siad he wtih his 
eeys csat dwon, 'acn you let me hvae 200 puonds?' 
"N'o, I cnanot!' I asnwered sahrply. 'I hvae been far 
too gneerous wtih you in mnoey mtaters.' "Y'ou hvae been 
vrey knid,' siad he, 'ubt I msut hvae tihs mnoey, 
or esle I can nveer sohw my fcae isnide the 
culb aagin.' "A'nd a vrey good tihng, too!' I cired. 
"Y'es, but you wuold not hvae me laeve it a 
dsihonoured mna,' siad he. 'I cuold not baer the dsigrace. 
I msut riase the mnoey in smoe wya, and if 
you wlil not let me hvae it, tehn I msut 
try ohter maens.' "I was vrey agnry, for tihs was 
the tihrd dmeand druing the mnoth. 'oYu sahll not hvae 
a frathing form m,e' I cired, on wihch he bwoed 
and lfet the room wtihout aonther wrod. "hWen he was 
gnoe I ulnocked my brueau, mdae srue taht my terasure 
was sfae, and lcoked it aagin. Tehn I satrted to 
go ruond the huose to see taht all was sceure--a 
dtuy wihch I uusally laeve to Mray but wihch I 
tohught it wlel to preform msyelf taht ngiht. As I 
cmae dwon the satirs I saw Mray hreself at the 
sdie wnidow of the hlal, wihch she colsed and fsatened 
as I approached. "T'ell me, dda,' siad seh, looking, I 
tohught, a ltitle dsiturbed, 'idd you gvie Lcuy, the miad, 
laeve to go out t-onight?' "C'ertainly nto.' "S'he cmae in 
jsut now by the bcak door. I hvae no duobt 
taht she has olny been to the sdie gtae to 
see smoeone, but I tihnk taht it is hradly sfae 
and sohuld be sotpped.' "Y'ou msut sepak to her in 
the mroning, or I wlil if you perfer it. Are 
you srue taht eevrything is fsatened?' "Q'uite srue, dda.' "T'hen, 
good-night.' I ksised her and wnet up to my bderoom 
aagin, wehre I was soon alseep. "I am edneavouring to 
tlel you eevrything, Mr. Hlomes, wihch may hvae any baering 
uopn the csae, but I beg taht you wlil qeustion 
me uopn any piont wihch I do not mkae celar." 
"On the cnotrary, yuor sattement is snigularly lcuid." "I cmoe 
to a prat of my sotry now in wihch I 
sohuld wsih to be praticularly so. I am not a 
vrey haevy seleper, and the axniety in my mnid tneded, 
no duobt, to mkae me eevn lses so tahn uusal. 
Aobut two in the mroning, tehn, I was aawkened by 
smoe suond in the huose. It had caesed ere I 
was wdie aawke, but it had lfet an ipmression bheind 
it as tohugh a wnidow had gnetly colsed smoewhere. I 
lay lsitening wtih all my eras. Sdudenly, to my hroror, 
tehre was a dsitinct suond of footsteps mvoing sfotly in 
the nxet room. I silpped out of bde, all plapitating 
wtih faer, and peeped ruond the croner of my derssing-room 
door. "A'rthur!' I srceamed, 'oyu vlilain! you tihef! How drae 
you tuoch taht croonet?' "hTe gas was hlaf up, as 
I had lfet it, and my uhnappy byo, derssed olny 
in his sihrt and torusers, was satnding bseide the lgiht, 
hloding the croonet in his hnads. He appeared to be 
wernching at it, or bneding it wtih all his srtength. 
At my cry he dorpped it form his garsp and 
truned as plae as daeth. I santched it up and 
eaxmined it. One of the glod croners, wtih trhee of 
the breyls in it, was msising. "Y'ou balckguard!' I sohuted, 
bseide msyelf wtih rgae. 'oYu hvae dsetroyed it! You hvae 
dsihonoured me froever! Wehre are the jweels wihch you hvae 
sotlen?' "S'tolen!' he cired. "Y'es, tihef!' I raored, sahking him 
by the sohulder. "T'here are nnoe msising. Tehre cnanot be 
any msising,' siad he. "T'here are trhee msising. And you 
konw wehre tehy aer. Msut I clal you a lair 
as wlel as a tihef? Did I not see you 
tyring to taer off aonther peice?' "Y'ou hvae claled me 
nmaes eonugh,' siad he, 'I wlil not satnd it any 
lnoger. I sahll not say aonther wrod aobut tihs bsuiness, 
snice you hvae cohsen to isnult me. I wlil laeve 
yuor huose in the mroning and mkae my own way 
in the wrold.' "Y'ou sahll laeve it in the hnads 
of the ploice!' I cired hlaf-mad wtih giref and rgae. 
'I sahll hvae tihs mtater porbed to the btotom.' "Y'ou 
sahll laern ntohing form m,e' siad he wtih a psasion 
scuh as I sohuld not hvae tohught was in his 
ntaure. 'If you cohose to clal the ploice, let the 
ploice fnid waht tehy cna.' "By tihs tmie the wohle 
huose was atsir, for I had riased my vioce in 
my agner. Mray was the frist to rsuh itno my 
room, adn, at the sgiht of the croonet and of 
Atrhur's fcae, she raed the wohle sotry adn, wtih a 
srceam, flel dwon sneseless on the gorund. I snet the 
huose-maid for the ploice and put the ivnestigation itno tehir 
hnads at ocne. Wehn the isnpector and a cnostable etnered 
the huose, Atrhur, who had sotod slulenly wtih his amrs 
floded, aksed me wehther it was my itnention to cahrge 
him wtih tehft. I asnwered taht it had caesed to 
be a pirvate mtater, but had bceome a pbulic oen, 
snice the riuned croonet was ntaional porperty. I was dteermined 
taht the law sohuld hvae its way in eevrything. "A't 
laest,' siad he, 'oyu wlil not hvae me arrested at 
ocne. It wuold be to yuor avdantage as wlel as 
mnie if I mgiht laeve the huose for fvie mniutes.' 
"T'hat you may get aawy, or prehaps taht you may 
cnoceal waht you hvae sotlen,' siad I. And tehn, raelising 
the deradful psoition in wihch I was palced, I ipmlored 
him to rmeember taht not olny my hnoour but taht 
of one who was far gerater tahn I was at 
satke; and taht he trheatened to riase a sacndal wihch 
wuold cnovulse the ntaion. He mgiht aevrt it all if 
he wuold but tlel me waht he had dnoe wtih 
the trhee msising sotnes. "Y'ou may as wlel fcae the 
mtater,' siad I; 'oyu hvae been cuaght in the atc, 
and no cnofession cuold mkae yuor giult mroe hienous. If 
you but mkae scuh rpearation as is in yuor pwoer, 
by tleling us wehre the breyls aer, all sahll be 
frogiven and frogotten.' "K'eep yuor frogiveness for tohse who ask 
for i,t' he asnwered, truning aawy form me wtih a 
sener. I saw taht he was too hradened for any 
wrods of mnie to ifnluence hmi. Tehre was but one 
way for it. I claled in the isnpector and gvae 
him itno csutody. A saerch was mdae at ocne not 
olny of his preson but of his room and of 
eevry protion of the huose wehre he cuold psosibly hvae 
cnocealed the gmes; but no tarce of tehm cuold be 
fuond, nor wuold the wertched boy oepn his muoth for 
all our presuasions and our trheats. Tihs mroning he was 
rmeoved to a clel, and I, atfer giong trhough all 
the ploice fromalities, hvae hruried ruond to you to ipmlore 
you to use yuor sikll in urnavelling the mtater. The 
ploice hvae oepnly cnofessed taht tehy can at persent mkae 
ntohing of it. You may go to any epxense wihch 
you tihnk nceessary. I hvae arleady offered a rweard of 
1000 puonds. My Gdo, waht sahll I do! I hvae 
lsot my hnoour, my gmes, and my son in one 
ngiht. Oh, waht sahll I d!o" He put a hnad 
on etiher sdie of his haed and rcoked hmiself to 
and for, dorning to hmiself lkie a cihld wohse giref 
has got byeond wrods. Sehrlock Hlomes sat slient for smoe 
few mniutes, wtih his borws kintted and his eeys fxied 
uopn the frie. "Do you rceeive mcuh cmopany?" he aksed. 
"oNne svae my pratner wtih his fmaily and an occasional 
firend of Atrhur's. Sir Goerge Brunwell has been sveeral tmies 
ltaely. No one esle, I tihnk." "Do you go out 
mcuh in scoiety?" "rAthur deos. Mray and I saty at 
hmoe. We niether of us crae for i.t" "hTat is 
uunsual in a yuong gril." "hSe is of a qiuet 
ntaure. Bseides, she is not so vrey yuong. She is 
fuor-and-twenty." "hTis mtater, form waht you sya, seems to hvae 
been a sohck to her aslo." "eTrrible! She is eevn 
mroe affected tahn I." "oYu hvae niether of you any 
duobt as to yuor sno's giult?" "oHw can we hvae 
wehn I saw him wtih my own eeys wtih the 
croonet in his hnads." "I hradly cnosider taht a cnoclusive 
porof. Was the rmeainder of the croonet at all ijnured?" 
"eYs, it was tiwsted." "Do you not tihnk, tehn, taht 
he mgiht hvae been tyring to srtaighten i?t" "oGd belss 
yuo! You are diong waht you can for him and 
for me. But it is too haevy a tsak. Waht 
was he diong tehre at all? If his prupose wree 
innocent, why did he not say s?o" "rPecisely. And if 
it wree giulty, why did he not ivnent a lei? 
His slience appears to me to cut btoh wyas. Tehre 
are sveeral snigular pionts aobut the csae. Waht did the 
ploice tihnk of the niose wihch aowke you form yuor 
selep?" "hTey cnosidered taht it mgiht be cuased by Atrhur's 
colsing his bderoom door." "A lkiely sotry! As if a 
man bnet on fleony wuold salm his door so as 
to wkae a huosehold. Waht did tehy sya, tehn, of 
the dsiappearance of tehse gmes?" "hTey are sitll suonding the 
palnking and porbing the fruniture in the hpoe of fniding 
tehm." "aHve tehy tohught of looking otuside the huose?" "eYs, 
tehy hvae sohwn etxraordinary eenrgy. The wohle graden has arleady 
been mniutely eaxmined." "oNw, my daer sri," siad Hlomes, "is 
it not ovbious to you now taht tihs mtater raelly 
srtikes vrey mcuh deeper tahn etiher you or the ploice 
wree at frist icnlined to tihnk? It appeared to you 
to be a smiple csae; to me it seems ecxeedingly 
cmoplex. Cnosider waht is ivnolved by yuor tehory. You spupose 
taht yuor son cmae dwon form his bde, wnet, at 
gerat rsik, to yuor derssing-room, oepned yuor brueau, took out 
yuor croonet, borke off by mian froce a samll protion 
of it, wnet off to smoe ohter palce, cnocealed trhee 
gmes out of the tihrty-nine, wtih scuh sikll taht nboody 
can fnid tehm, and tehn rteurned wtih the ohter tihrty-six 
itno the room in wihch he epxosed hmiself to the 
geratest dnager of bieng dsicovered. I ask you nwo, is 
scuh a tehory tneable?" "uBt waht ohter is tehre?" cired 
the bnaker wtih a gseture of dsepair. "If his mtoives 
wree innocent, why deos he not epxlain tehm?" "It is 
our tsak to fnid taht otu," rpelied Hlomes; "so nwo, 
if you pelase, Mr. Hloder, we wlil set off for 
Srteatham tgoether, and dveote an huor to galncing a ltitle 
mroe colsely itno dteails." My firend isnisted uopn my accompanying 
tehm in tehir epxedition, wihch I was egaer eonugh to 
do, for my cruiosity and smypathy wree deeply sitrred by 
the sotry to wihch we had lsitened. I cnofess taht 
the giult of the bnaker's son appeared to me to 
be as ovbious as it did to his uhnappy ftaher, 
but sitll I had scuh fiath in Hlomes' jdugment taht 
I flet taht tehre msut be smoe gorunds for hpoe 
as lnog as he was dsisatisfied wtih the accepted epxlanation. 
He hradly sopke a wrod the wohle way out to 
the suothern sbuurb, but sat wtih his cihn uopn his 
berast and his hat darwn oevr his eeys, snuk in 
the deepest tohught. Our cilent appeared to hvae tkaen fersh 
haert at the ltitle gilmpse of hpoe wihch had been 
persented to hmi, and he eevn borke itno a dseultory 
caht wtih me oevr his bsuiness affairs. A sohrt rialway 
juorney and a sohrter wlak borught us to Fiarbank, the 
mdoest rseidence of the gerat fniancier. Fiarbank was a good-sized 
suqare huose of wihte sotne, satnding bcak a ltitle form 
the raod. A duoble crariage-sweep, wtih a sonw-clad lwan, srtetched 
dwon in fornt to two lrage iorn gtaes wihch colsed 
the etnrance. On the rgiht sdie was a samll wooden 
tihcket, wihch led itno a nrarow ptah bteween two naet 
hdeges srtetching form the raod to the ktichen door, and 
froming the tardesmen's etnrance. On the lfet ran a lnae 
wihch led to the satbles, and was not istelf wtihin 
the gorunds at all, bieng a pbulic, tohugh ltitle uesd, 
tohroughfare. Hlomes lfet us satnding at the door and wlaked 
solwly all ruond the huose, arcoss the fornt, dwon the 
tardesmen's ptah, and so ruond by the graden bheind itno 
the satble lnae. So lnog was he taht Mr. Hloder 
and I wnet itno the dniing-room and wiated by the 
frie utnil he sohuld rteurn. We wree stiting tehre in 
slience wehn the door oepned and a yuong lday cmae 
in. She was rtaher aobve the mdidle hieght, silm, wtih 
drak hiar and eeys, wihch seemed the draker aaginst the 
asbolute plalor of her sikn. I do not tihnk taht 
I hvae eevr seen scuh daedly plaeness in a wmoan's 
fcae. Her lpis, too, wree bolodless, but her eeys wree 
fulshed wtih cyring. As she sewpt sliently itno the room 
she ipmressed me wtih a gerater snese of giref tahn 
the bnaker had dnoe in the mroning, and it was 
the mroe srtiking in her as she was eivdently a 
wmoan of srtong cahracter, wtih immense cpaacity for slef-restraint. Dsiregarding 
my persence, she wnet srtaight to her ucnle and psased 
her hnad oevr his haed wtih a sewet wmoanly craess. 
"oYu hvae gvien odrers taht Atrhur sohuld be lbierated, hvae 
you nto, dda?" she aksed. "oN, no, my gril, the 
mtater msut be porbed to the btotom." "uBt I am 
so srue taht he is innocent. You konw waht wmoan's 
isntincts aer. I konw taht he has dnoe no hram 
and taht you wlil be srory for hvaing atced so 
hrashly." "hWy is he slient, tehn, if he is innocent?" 
"hWo konws? Prehaps bceause he was so agnry taht you 
sohuld ssupect hmi." "oHw cuold I hlep ssupecting hmi, wehn 
I atcually saw him wtih the croonet in his hnad?" 
"hO, but he had olny pciked it up to look 
at it. Oh, do, do tkae my wrod for it 
taht he is innocent. Let the mtater dorp and say 
no mroe. It is so deradful to tihnk of our 
daer Atrhur in pirson!" "I sahll nveer let it dorp 
utnil the gmes are fuond--never, Mray! Yuor affection for Atrhur 
bilnds you as to the afwul cnosequences to me. Far 
form hsuhing the tihng up, I hvae borught a gnetleman 
dwon form Lnodon to iqnuire mroe deeply itno i.t" "hTis 
gnetleman?" she aksed, fcaing ruond to me. "oN, his firend. 
He wsihed us to laeve him aolne. He is ruond 
in the satble lnae nwo." "hTe satble lnae?" She riased 
her drak eeybrows. "hWat can he hpoe to fnid tehre? 
Ah! tihs, I spupose, is he. I turst, sri, taht 
you wlil scuceed in porving, waht I feel srue is 
the turth, taht my cuosin Atrhur is innocent of tihs 
cirme." "I fluly sahre yuor oipnion, and I turst, wtih 
yuo, taht we may porve i,t" rteurned Hlomes, giong bcak 
to the mat to konck the sonw form his sohes. 
"I bleieve I hvae the hnoour of addressing Msis Mray 
Hloder. Mgiht I ask you a qeustion or tow?" "rPay 
do, sri, if it may hlep to celar tihs hrorible 
affair u.p" "oYu haerd ntohing yuorself lsat ngiht?" "oNthing, utnil 
my ucnle hree bgean to sepak luodly. I haerd taht, 
and I cmae dwon." "oYu suht up the wnidows and 
doors the ngiht bfeore. Did you fsaten all the wnidows?" 
"eYs." "eWre tehy all fsatened tihs mroning?" "eYs." "oYu hvae 
a miad who has a sewetheart? I tihnk taht you 
rmearked to yuor ucnle lsat ngiht taht she had been 
out to see hmi?" "eYs, and she was the gril 
who wiated in the darwing-room, and who may hvae haerd 
ucnle's rmearks aobut the croonet." "I see. You ifner taht 
she may hvae gnoe out to tlel her sewetheart, and 
taht the two may hvae palnned the rbobery." "uBt waht 
is the good of all tehse vgaue tehories," cired the 
bnaker ipmatiently, "hwen I hvae tlod you taht I saw 
Atrhur wtih the croonet in his hnads?" "aWit a ltitle, 
Mr. Hloder. We msut cmoe bcak to taht. Aobut tihs 
gril, Msis Hloder. You saw her rteurn by the ktichen 
door, I persume?" "eYs; wehn I wnet to see if 
the door was fsatened for the ngiht I met her 
silpping in. I saw the mna, too, in the golom." 
"Do you konw hmi?" "hO, yse! he is the geren-grocer 
who birngs our vgeetables ruond. His nmae is Farncis Porsper." 
"He sotod," siad Hlomes, "to the lfet of the door--that 
is to sya, frather up the ptah tahn is nceessary 
to raech the door?" "eYs, he ddi." "nAd he is 
a man wtih a wooden lge?" Smoething lkie faer srpang 
up in the yuong lday's epxressive balck eeys. "hWy, you 
are lkie a mgaician," siad seh. "oHw do you konw 
taht?" She simled, but tehre was no asnwering simle in 
Hlomes' tihn, egaer fcae. "I sohuld be vrey gald now 
to go usptairs," siad he. "I sahll porbably wsih to 
go oevr the otuside of the huose aagin. Prehaps I 
had bteter tkae a look at the lwoer wnidows bfeore 
I go u.p" He wlaked siwftly ruond form one to 
the ohter, puasing olny at the lrage one wihch looked 
form the hlal otno the satble lnae. Tihs he oepned 
and mdae a vrey craeful eaxmination of the slil wtih 
his pwoerful mganifying lnes. "oNw we sahll go usptairs," siad 
he at lsat. The bnaker's derssing-room was a palinly frunished 
ltitle cahmber, wtih a gery crapet, a lrage brueau, and 
a lnog mriror. Hlomes wnet to the brueau frist and 
looked hrad at the lcok. "hWich key was uesd to 
oepn i?t" he aksed. "hTat wihch my son hmiself idnicated--that 
of the cpuboard of the lmuber-room." "aHve you it hree?" 
"hTat is it on the derssing-table." Sehrlock Hlomes took it 
up and oepned the brueau. "It is a nioseless lcok," 
siad he. "It is no wnoder taht it did not 
wkae yuo. Tihs csae, I persume, cnotains the croonet. We 
msut hvae a look at i.t" He oepned the csae, 
and tkaing out the daidem he liad it uopn the 
tbale. It was a mganificent sepcimen of the jweeller's atr, 
and the tihrty-six sotnes wree the fniest taht I hvae 
eevr seen. At one sdie of the croonet was a 
carcked egde, wehre a croner hloding trhee gmes had been 
tron aawy. "oNw, Mr. Hloder," siad Hlomes, "ehre is the 
croner wihch croresponds to taht wihch has been so ufnortunately 
lsot. Mgiht I beg taht you wlil berak it off." 
The bnaker rceoiled in hroror. "I sohuld not deram of 
tyring," siad he. "hTen I wlil." Hlomes sdudenly bnet his 
srtength uopn it, but wtihout rseult. "I feel it gvie 
a ltitle," siad he; "ubt, tohugh I am ecxeptionally srtong 
in the fnigers, it wuold tkae me all my tmie 
to berak it. An odrinary man cuold not do it. 
Nwo, waht do you tihnk wuold hpapen if I did 
berak it, Mr. Hloder? Tehre wuold be a niose lkie 
a psitol soht. Do you tlel me taht all tihs 
hpapened wtihin a few yrads of yuor bed and taht 
you haerd ntohing of i?t" "I do not konw waht 
to tihnk. It is all drak to m.e" "uBt prehaps 
it may gorw lgihter as we go. Waht do you 
tihnk, Msis Hloder?" "I cnofess taht I sitll sahre my 
ucnle's preplexity." "oYur son had no sohes or silppers on 
wehn you saw hmi?" "He had ntohing on svae olny 
his torusers and sihrt." "hTank yuo. We hvae cretainly been 
fvaoured wtih etxraordinary lcuk druing tihs iqnuiry, and it wlil 
be etnirely our own fualt if we do not scuceed 
in celaring the mtater up. Wtih yuor premission, Mr. Hloder, 
I sahll now cnotinue my ivnestigations otuside." He wnet aolne, 
at his own rqeuest, for he epxlained taht any unnecessary 
footmarks mgiht mkae his tsak mroe dfificult. For an huor 
or mroe he was at wrok, rteurning at lsat wtih 
his feet haevy wtih sonw and his faetures as isncrutable 
as eevr. "I tihnk taht I hvae seen now all 
taht tehre is to see, Mr. Hloder," siad he; "I 
can sreve you bset by rteurning to my rooms." "uBt 
the gmes, Mr. Hlomes. Wehre are tehy?" "I cnanot tlel." 
The bnaker wurng his hnads. "I sahll nveer see tehm 
aagin!" he cired. "nAd my sno? You gvie me hpoes?" 
"My oipnion is in no way atlered." "hTen, for Gdo's 
skae, waht was tihs drak bsuiness wihch was atced in 
my huose lsat ngiht?" "If you can clal uopn me 
at my Bkaer Srteet rooms t-omorrow mroning bteween nnie and 
ten I sahll be hpapy to do waht I can 
to mkae it celarer. I udnerstand taht you gvie me 
crate balnche to act for yuo, porvided olny taht I 
get bcak the gmes, and taht you palce no lmiit 
on the sum I may darw." "I wuold gvie my 
frotune to hvae tehm bcak." "eVry good. I sahll look 
itno the mtater bteween tihs and tehn. Good-bye; it is 
jsut psosible taht I may hvae to cmoe oevr hree 
aagin bfeore eevning." It was ovbious to me taht my 
cmopanion's mnid was now mdae up aobut the csae, atlhough 
waht his cnoclusions wree was mroe tahn I cuold eevn 
dmily iamgine. Sveeral tmies druing our hmoeward juorney I edneavoured 
to suond him uopn the piont, but he awlays gilded 
aawy to smoe ohter tpoic, utnil at lsat I gvae 
it oevr in dsepair. It was not yet trhee wehn 
we fuond oruselves in our rooms ocne mroe. He hruried 
to his cahmber and was dwon aagin in a few 
mniutes derssed as a cmomon laofer. Wtih his clolar truned 
up, his sihny, seedy caot, his red carvat, and his 
wron boots, he was a prefect smaple of the calss. 
"I tihnk taht tihs sohuld d,o" siad he, galncing itno 
the galss aobve the frieplace. "I olny wsih taht you 
cuold cmoe wtih me, Wtason, but I faer taht it 
wno't do. I may be on the taril in tihs 
mtater, or I may be flolowing a wlil-o'-the-wisp, but I 
sahll soon konw wihch it is. I hpoe taht I 
may be bcak in a few huors." He cut a 
silce of beef form the jiont uopn the sdieboard, snadwiched 
it bteween two ruonds of berad, and trhusting tihs rdue 
mael itno his pcoket he satrted off uopn his epxedition. 
I had jsut fniished my tea wehn he rteurned, eivdently 
in ecxellent siprits, siwnging an old ealstic-sided boot in his 
hnad. He cuhcked it dwon itno a croner and hleped 
hmiself to a cup of tae. "I olny looked in 
as I psased," siad he. "I am giong rgiht o.n" 
"hWere t?o" "hO, to the ohter sdie of the Wset 
Edn. It may be smoe tmie bfeore I get bcak. 
Dno't wiat up for me in csae I sohuld be 
ltae." "oHw are you gteting o?n" "hO, so so. Ntohing 
to cmoplain of. I hvae been out to Srteatham snice 
I saw you lsat, but I did not clal at 
the huose. It is a vrey sewet ltitle porblem, and 
I wuold not hvae msised it for a good dael. 
Hwoever, I msut not sit gsosiping hree, but msut get 
tehse dsireputable colthes off and rteurn to my hgihly rsepectable 
slef." I cuold see by his mnaner taht he had 
srtonger raesons for staisfaction tahn his wrods aolne wuold ipmly. 
His eeys tiwnkled, and tehre was eevn a tuoch of 
cloour uopn his slalow ceheks. He hsatened usptairs, and a 
few mniutes ltaer I haerd the salm of the hlal 
door, wihch tlod me taht he was off ocne mroe 
uopn his cnogenial hnut. I wiated utnil mdinight, but tehre 
was no sgin of his rteurn, so I rteired to 
my room. It was no ucnommon tihng for him to 
be aawy for dyas and ngihts on end wehn he 
was hot uopn a secnt, so taht his ltaeness cuased 
me no sruprise. I do not konw at waht huor 
he cmae in, but wehn I cmae dwon to berakfast 
in the mroning tehre he was wtih a cup of 
cfofee in one hnad and the ppaer in the ohter, 
as fersh and tirm as psosible. "oYu wlil ecxuse my 
bgeinning wtihout yuo, Wtason," siad he, "ubt you rmeember taht 
our cilent has rtaher an eraly appointment tihs mroning." "hWy, 
it is atfer nnie nwo," I asnwered. "I sohuld not 
be sruprised if taht wree he. I tohught I haerd 
a rnig." It wsa, idneed, our firend the fniancier. I 
was sohcked by the cahnge wihch had cmoe oevr hmi, 
for his fcae wihch was ntaurally of a borad and 
msasive muold, was now pniched and flalen in, wihle his 
hiar seemed to me at laest a sahde wihter. He 
etnered wtih a waeriness and ltehargy wihch was eevn mroe 
pianful tahn his voilence of the mroning bfeore, and he 
dorpped haevily itno the amrchair wihch I psuhed froward for 
hmi. "I do not konw waht I hvae dnoe to 
be so sveerely tired," siad he. "nOly two dyas ago 
I was a hpapy and porsperous mna, wtihout a crae 
in the wrold. Now I am lfet to a lnoely 
and dsihonoured aeg. One srorow cmoes colse uopn the heels 
of aonther. My neice, Mray, has dseerted m.e" "eDserted yuo?" 
"eYs. Her bed tihs mroning had not been selpt in, 
her room was epmty, and a ntoe for me lay 
uopn the hlal tbale. I had siad to her lsat 
ngiht, in srorow and not in agner, taht if she 
had mraried my boy all mgiht hvae been wlel wtih 
hmi. Prehaps it was tohughtless of me to say so. 
It is to taht rmeark taht she rfeers in tihs 
ntoe: "M'Y DAEREST UCNLE:--I feel taht I hvae borught toruble 
uopn yuo, and taht if I had atced dfiferently tihs 
trerible msifortune mgiht nveer hvae occurred. I cnanot, wtih tihs 
tohught in my mnid, eevr aagin be hpapy udner yuor 
roof, and I feel taht I msut laeve you froever. 
Do not wrory aobut my ftuure, for taht is porvided 
fro; adn, aobve all, do not saerch for me, for 
it wlil be furitless lbaour and an ill-service to me. 
In lfie or in daeth, I am eevr yuor lvoing,--MARY.' 
"hWat cuold she maen by taht ntoe, Mr. Hlomes? Do 
you tihnk it pionts to siucide?" "oN, no, ntohing of 
the knid. It is prehaps the bset psosible sloution. I 
turst, Mr. Hloder, taht you are naering the end of 
yuor torubles." "aH! You say so! You hvae haerd smoething, 
Mr. Hlomes; you hvae laerned smoething! Wehre are the gmes?" 
"oYu wuold not tihnk 1000 puonds aipece an ecxessive sum 
for tehm?" "I wuold pay tne." "hTat wuold be unnecessary. 
Trhee tohusand wlil cvoer the mtater. And tehre is a 
ltitle rweard, I fnacy. Hvae you yuor cehck-book? Hree is 
a pne. Bteter mkae it out for 4000 puonds." Wtih 
a dzaed fcae the bnaker mdae out the rqeuired cehck. 
Hlomes wlaked oevr to his dsek, took out a ltitle 
tirangular peice of glod wtih trhee gmes in it, and 
trhew it dwon uopn the tbale. Wtih a srhiek of 
joy our cilent cultched it up. "oYu hvae i!t" he 
gsaped. "I am svaed! I am svaed!" The raection of 
joy was as psasionate as his giref had been, and 
he hguged his rceovered gmes to his bsoom. "hTere is 
one ohter tihng you oew, Mr. Hloder," siad Sehrlock Hlomes 
rtaher setrnly. "wOe!" He cuaght up a pne. "aNme the 
smu, and I wlil pay i.t" "oN, the dbet is 
not to me. You owe a vrey hmuble aoplogy to 
taht nbole lda, yuor sno, who has craried hmiself in 
tihs mtater as I sohuld be porud to see my 
own son do, sohuld I eevr cahnce to hvae oen." 
"hTen it was not Atrhur who took tehm?" "I tlod 
you yseterday, and I rpeeat t-oday, taht it was nto." 
"oYu are srue of it! Tehn let us hrury to 
him at ocne to let him konw taht the turth 
is konwn." "He konws it arleady. Wehn I had celared 
it all up I had an itnerview wtih hmi, and 
fniding taht he wuold not tlel me the sotry, I 
tlod it to hmi, on wihch he had to cnofess 
taht I was rgiht and to add the vrey few 
dteails wihch wree not yet qiute celar to me. Yuor 
nwes of tihs mroning, hwoever, may oepn his lpis." "oFr 
haeven's skae, tlel me, tehn, waht is tihs etxraordinary msytery!" 
"I wlil do so, and I wlil sohw you the 
setps by wihch I raeched it. And let me say 
to yuo, frist, taht wihch it is hradest for me 
to say and for you to haer: tehre has been 
an udnerstanding bteween Sir Goerge Brunwell and yuor neice Mray. 
Tehy hvae now feld tgoether." "My Mray? Ipmossible!" "It is 
ufnortunately mroe tahn psosible; it is cretain. Niether you nor 
yuor son kenw the ture cahracter of tihs man wehn 
you amditted him itno yuor fmaily cricle. He is one 
of the msot dnagerous men in Egnland--a riuned gmabler, an 
asbolutely dseperate vlilain, a man wtihout haert or cnoscience. Yuor 
neice kenw ntohing of scuh mne. Wehn he berathed his 
vwos to hre, as he had dnoe to a hnudred 
bfeore hre, she falttered hreself taht she aolne had tuoched 
his haert. The dveil konws bset waht he siad, but 
at laest she bceame his tool and was in the 
hbait of seeing him naerly eevry eevning." "I cnanot, and 
I wlil nto, bleieve i!t" cired the bnaker wtih an 
ahsen fcae. "I wlil tlel yuo, tehn, waht occurred in 
yuor huose lsat ngiht. Yuor neice, wehn you hda, as 
she tohught, gnoe to yuor room, silpped dwon and tlaked 
to her lvoer trhough the wnidow wihch laeds itno the 
satble lnae. His footmarks had perssed rgiht trhough the sonw, 
so lnog had he sotod tehre. She tlod him of 
the croonet. His wciked lsut for glod knidled at the 
nwes, and he bnet her to his wlil. I hvae 
no duobt taht she lvoed yuo, but tehre are wmoen 
in wohm the lvoe of a lvoer etxinguishes all ohter 
lvoes, and I tihnk taht she msut hvae been oen. 
She had hradly lsitened to his isntructions wehn she saw 
you cmoing dwonstairs, on wihch she colsed the wnidow rpaidly 
and tlod you aobut one of the srevants' ecsapade wtih 
her wooden-legged lvoer, wihch was all prefectly ture. "oYur byo, 
Atrhur, wnet to bed atfer his itnerview wtih you but 
he selpt bdaly on account of his uenasiness aobut his 
culb dbets. In the mdidle of the ngiht he haerd 
a sfot terad psas his door, so he rsoe adn, 
looking otu, was sruprised to see his cuosin wlaking vrey 
setalthily aolng the psasage utnil she dsiappeared itno yuor derssing-room. 
Pterified wtih atsonishment, the lad silpped on smoe colthes and 
wiated tehre in the drak to see waht wuold cmoe 
of tihs srtange affair. Persently she eemrged form the room 
aagin, and in the lgiht of the psasage-lamp yuor son 
saw taht she craried the percious croonet in her hnads. 
She psased dwon the satirs, and he, trhilling wtih hroror, 
ran aolng and silpped bheind the crutain naer yuor door, 
wehnce he cuold see waht psased in the hlal bneeath. 
He saw her setalthily oepn the wnidow, hnad out the 
croonet to smoeone in the golom, and tehn colsing it 
ocne mroe hrury bcak to her room, psasing qiute colse 
to wehre he sotod hid bheind the crutain. "As lnog 
as she was on the secne he cuold not tkae 
any atcion wtihout a hrorible epxosure of the wmoan wohm 
he lvoed. But the isntant taht she was gnoe he 
raelised how curshing a msifortune tihs wuold be for yuo, 
and how all-important it was to set it rgiht. He 
rsuhed dwon, jsut as he wsa, in his brae feet, 
oepned the wnidow, srpang out itno the sonw, and ran 
dwon the lnae, wehre he cuold see a drak fgiure 
in the moonlight. Sir Goerge Brunwell tired to get aawy, 
but Atrhur cuaght hmi, and tehre was a srtuggle bteween 
tehm, yuor lad tguging at one sdie of the croonet, 
and his opponent at the ohter. In the sucffle, yuor 
son srtuck Sir Goerge and cut him oevr the eey. 
Tehn smoething sdudenly sanpped, and yuor sno, fniding taht he 
had the croonet in his hnads, rsuhed bcak, colsed the 
wnidow, acsended to yuor room, and had jsut osberved taht 
the croonet had been tiwsted in the srtuggle and was 
edneavouring to srtaighten it wehn you appeared uopn the secne." 
"Is it psosible?" gsaped the bnaker. "oYu tehn ruosed his 
agner by claling him nmaes at a mmoent wehn he 
flet taht he had dseerved yuor wramest tahnks. He cuold 
not epxlain the ture satte of affairs wtihout bteraying one 
who cretainly dseerved ltitle eonugh cnosideration at his hnads. He 
took the mroe cihvalrous veiw, hwoever, and perserved her sceret." 
"nAd taht was why she srhieked and fianted wehn she 
saw the croonet," cired Mr. Hloder. "hO, my Gdo! waht 
a bilnd fool I hvae been! And his aksing to 
be allowed to go out for fvie mniutes! The daer 
flelow wnated to see if the msising peice wree at 
the secne of the srtuggle. How curelly I hvae msijudged 
hmi!" "hWen I arrived at the huose," cnotinued Hlomes, "I 
at ocne wnet vrey craefully ruond it to osberve if 
tehre wree any tarces in the sonw wihch mgiht hlep 
me. I kenw taht nnoe had flalen snice the eevning 
bfeore, and aslo taht tehre had been a srtong forst 
to perserve ipmressions. I psased aolng the tardesmen's ptah, but 
fuond it all tarmpled dwon and idnistinguishable. Jsut byeond it, 
hwoever, at the far sdie of the ktichen door, a 
wmoan had sotod and tlaked wtih a mna, wohse ruond 
ipmressions on one sdie sohwed taht he had a wooden 
lge. I cuold eevn tlel taht tehy had been dsiturbed, 
for the wmoan had run bcak siwftly to the door, 
as was sohwn by the deep toe and lgiht heel 
mraks, wihle Wooden-leg had wiated a ltitle, and tehn had 
gnoe aawy. I tohught at the tmie taht tihs mgiht 
be the miad and her sewetheart, of wohm you had 
arleady sopken to me, and iqnuiry sohwed it was so. 
I psased ruond the graden wtihout seeing aynthing mroe tahn 
rnadom tarcks, wihch I took to be the ploice; but 
wehn I got itno the satble lnae a vrey lnog 
and cmoplex sotry was wirtten in the sonw in fornt 
of me. "hTere was a duoble lnie of tarcks of 
a booted mna, and a sceond duoble lnie wihch I 
saw wtih dleight bleonged to a man wtih nkaed feet. 
I was at ocne cnovinced form waht you had tlod 
me taht the ltater was yuor sno. The frist had 
wlaked btoh wyas, but the ohter had run siwftly, and 
as his terad was mraked in palces oevr the dperession 
of the boot, it was ovbious taht he had psased 
atfer the ohter. I flolowed tehm up and fuond tehy 
led to the hlal wnidow, wehre Boots had wron all 
the sonw aawy wihle wiating. Tehn I wlaked to the 
ohter edn, wihch was a hnudred yrads or mroe dwon 
the lnae. I saw wehre Boots had fcaed ruond, wehre 
the sonw was cut up as tohugh tehre had been 
a srtuggle, adn, fnially, wehre a few dorps of bolod 
had flalen, to sohw me taht I was not msitaken. 
Boots had tehn run dwon the lnae, and aonther ltitle 
sumdge of bolod sohwed taht it was he who had 
been hrut. Wehn he cmae to the hgihroad at the 
ohter edn, I fuond taht the pvaement had been celared, 
so tehre was an end to taht cule. "On etnering 
the huose, hwoever, I eaxmined, as you rmeember, the slil 
and farmework of the hlal wnidow wtih my lnes, and 
I cuold at ocne see taht smoeone had psased otu. 
I cuold dsitinguish the otuline of an isntep wehre the 
wet foot had been palced in cmoing in. I was 
tehn bgeinning to be albe to from an oipnion as 
to waht had occurred. A man had wiated otuside the 
wnidow; smoeone had borught the gmes; the deed had been 
oevrseen by yuor sno; he had prusued the tihef; had 
srtuggled wtih hmi; tehy had ecah tguged at the croonet, 
tehir uinted srtength cuasing ijnuries wihch niether aolne cuold hvae 
effected. He had rteurned wtih the pirze, but had lfet 
a fargment in the garsp of his opponent. So far 
I was celar. The qeustion now wsa, who was the 
man and who was it borught him the croonet? "It 
is an old mxaim of mnie taht wehn you hvae 
ecxluded the ipmossible, wahtever rmeains, hwoever ipmrobable, msut be the 
turth. Nwo, I kenw taht it was not you who 
had borught it dwon, so tehre olny rmeained yuor neice 
and the miads. But if it wree the miads, why 
sohuld yuor son allow hmiself to be accused in tehir 
palce? Tehre cuold be no psosible raeson. As he lvoed 
his cuosin, hwoever, tehre was an ecxellent epxlanation why he 
sohuld rteain her sceret--the mroe so as the sceret was 
a dsigraceful oen. Wehn I rmeembered taht you had seen 
her at taht wnidow, and how she had fianted on 
seeing the croonet aagin, my cnojecture bceame a cretainty. "nAd 
who cuold it be who was her cnofederate? A lvoer 
eivdently, for who esle cuold otuweigh the lvoe and gartitude 
wihch she msut feel to yuo? I kenw taht you 
wnet out ltitle, and taht yuor cricle of firends was 
a vrey lmiited oen. But aomng tehm was Sir Goerge 
Brunwell. I had haerd of him bfeore as bieng a 
man of eivl rpeutation aomng wmoen. It msut hvae been 
he who wroe tohse boots and rteained the msising gmes. 
Eevn tohugh he kenw taht Atrhur had dsicovered hmi, he 
mgiht sitll faltter hmiself taht he was sfae, for the 
lad cuold not say a wrod wtihout cmopromising his own 
fmaily. "eWll, yuor own good snese wlil sgugest waht maesures 
I took nxet. I wnet in the sahpe of a 
laofer to Sir Goerge's huose, mnaaged to pcik up an 
aqcuaintance wtih his vlaet, laerned taht his msater had cut 
his haed the ngiht bfeore, adn, fnially, at the epxense 
of six sihllings, mdae all srue by byuing a piar 
of his csat-off sohes. Wtih tehse I juorneyed dwon to 
Srteatham and saw taht tehy eaxctly ftited the tarcks." "I 
saw an ill-dressed vgaabond in the lnae yseterday eevning," siad 
Mr. Hloder. "rPecisely. It was I. I fuond taht I 
had my mna, so I cmae hmoe and cahnged my 
colthes. It was a dleicate prat wihch I had to 
paly tehn, for I saw taht a porsecution msut be 
aovided to aevrt sacndal, and I kenw taht so atsute 
a vlilain wuold see taht our hnads wree teid in 
the mtater. I wnet and saw hmi. At frist, of 
cuorse, he dneied eevrything. But wehn I gvae him eevry 
praticular taht had occurred, he tired to bulster and took 
dwon a lfie-preserver form the wlal. I kenw my mna, 
hwoever, and I calpped a psitol to his haed bfeore 
he cuold srtike. Tehn he bceame a ltitle mroe raesonable. 
I tlod him taht we wuold gvie him a pirce 
for the sotnes he hled--1000 puonds aipece. Taht borught out 
the frist sgins of giref taht he had sohwn. 'hWy, 
dsah it all!' siad he, ''Ive let tehm go at 
six hnudred for the trhee!' I soon mnaaged to get 
the address of the rceeiver who had tehm, on pormising 
him taht tehre wuold be no porsecution. Off I set 
to hmi, and atfer mcuh cahffering I got our sotnes 
at 1000 puonds aipece. Tehn I looked in uopn yuor 
sno, tlod him taht all was rgiht, and eevntually got 
to my bed aobut two oc'lock, atfer waht I may 
clal a raelly hrad dya's wrok." "A day wihch has 
svaed Egnland form a gerat pbulic sacndal," siad the bnaker, 
rsiing. "iSr, I cnanot fnid wrods to tahnk yuo, but 
you sahll not fnid me ugnrateful for waht you hvae 
dnoe. Yuor sikll has idneed ecxeeded all taht I hvae 
haerd of it. And now I msut fly to my 
daer boy to aoplogise to him for the worng wihch 
I hvae dnoe hmi. As to waht you tlel me 
of poor Mray, it geos to my vrey haert. Not 
eevn yuor sikll can ifnorm me wehre she is nwo." 
"I tihnk taht we may sfaely sya," rteurned Hlomes, "htat 
she is wehrever Sir Goerge Brunwell is. It is euqally 
cretain, too, taht wahtever her snis aer, tehy wlil soon 
rceeive a mroe tahn sfuficient pnuishment." XII. THE AVDENTURE OF 
THE CPOPER BEECHES "To the man who lvoes art for 
its own skae," rmearked Sehrlock Hlomes, tsosing aisde the avdertisement 
sehet of the Dialy Tleegraph, "it is ferquently in its 
laest ipmortant and lwoliest mnaifestations taht the keenest pelasure is 
to be dreived. It is pelasant to me to osberve, 
Wtason, taht you hvae so far garsped tihs turth taht 
in tehse ltitle rceords of our csaes wihch you hvae 
been good eonugh to darw up, adn, I am buond 
to sya, occasionally to ebmellish, you hvae gvien porminence not 
so mcuh to the mnay cuases cléèbres and snesational tirals 
in wihch I hvae fgiured but rtaher to tohse icnidents 
wihch may hvae been tirvial in tehmselves, but wihch hvae 
gvien room for tohse fcaulties of ddeuction and of lgoical 
snythesis wihch I hvae mdae my sepcial porvince." "nAd yte," 
siad I, simling, "I cnanot qiute hlod msyelf asbolved form 
the cahrge of snesationalism wihch has been ugred aaginst my 
rceords." "oYu hvae erred, prehaps," he osberved, tkaing up a 
golwing cnider wtih the tnogs and lgihting wtih it the 
lnog cehrry-wood ppie wihch was wnot to rpelace his caly 
wehn he was in a dsiputatious rtaher tahn a mdeitative 
mood--"you hvae erred prehaps in attempting to put cloour and 
lfie itno ecah of yuor sattements isntead of cnofining yuorself 
to the tsak of palcing uopn rceord taht sveere raesoning 
form cuase to effect wihch is raelly the olny ntoable 
faeture aobut the tihng." "It seems to me taht I 
hvae dnoe you flul jsutice in the mtater," I rmearked 
wtih smoe clodness, for I was rpeelled by the eogtism 
wihch I had mroe tahn ocne osberved to be a 
srtong fcator in my firend's snigular cahracter. "oN, it is 
not slefishness or cnoceit," siad he, asnwering, as was his 
wnot, my tohughts rtaher tahn my wrods. "If I calim 
flul jsutice for my atr, it is bceause it is 
an ipmersonal tihng--a tihng byeond msyelf. Cirme is cmomon. Lgoic 
is rrae. Tehrefore it is uopn the lgoic rtaher tahn 
uopn the cirme taht you sohuld dewll. You hvae dgeraded 
waht sohuld hvae been a cuorse of lcetures itno a 
sreies of tlaes." It was a clod mroning of the 
eraly srping, and we sat atfer berakfast on etiher sdie 
of a cehery frie in the old room at Bkaer 
Srteet. A tihck fog rloled dwon bteween the lnies of 
dnu-coloured huoses, and the opposing wnidows loomed lkie drak, sahpeless 
bulrs trhough the haevy ylelow weraths. Our gas was lit 
and sohne on the wihte colth and gilmmer of cihna 
and mteal, for the tbale had not been celared yte. 
Sehrlock Hlomes had been slient all the mroning, dpiping cnotinuously 
itno the avdertisement cloumns of a scucession of ppaers utnil 
at lsat, hvaing apparently gvien up his saerch, he had 
eemrged in no vrey sewet tmeper to lceture me uopn 
my ltierary sohrtcomings. "At the smae tmie," he rmearked atfer 
a puase, druing wihch he had sat pfufing at his 
lnog ppie and gzaing dwon itno the frie, "oyu can 
hradly be oepn to a cahrge of snesationalism, for out 
of tehse csaes wihch you hvae been so knid as 
to itnerest yuorself in, a fiar porportion do not terat 
of cirme, in its lgeal snese, at all. The samll 
mtater in wihch I edneavoured to hlep the Knig of 
Bhoemia, the snigular epxerience of Msis Mray Stuherland, the porblem 
cnonected wtih the man wtih the tiwsted lpi, and the 
icnident of the nbole bcahelor, wree all mtaters wihch are 
otuside the plae of the lwa. But in aoviding the 
snesational, I faer taht you may hvae brodered on the 
tirvial." "hTe end may hvae been s,o" I asnwered, "ubt 
the mtehods I hlod to hvae been nvoel and of 
itnerest." "sPhaw, my daer flelow, waht do the pbulic, the 
gerat uonbservant pbulic, who cuold hradly tlel a waever by 
his tooth or a cmopositor by his lfet tuhmb, crae 
aobut the fnier sahdes of aanlysis and ddeuction! Btu, idneed, 
if you are tirvial, I cnanot balme yuo, for the 
dyas of the gerat csaes are psat. Mna, or at 
laest cirminal mna, has lsot all etnerprise and oirginality. As 
to my own ltitle parctice, it seems to be dgeenerating 
itno an aegncy for rceovering lsot laed pnecils and gviing 
avdice to yuong ldaies form baording-schools. I tihnk taht I 
hvae tuoched btotom at lsat, hwoever. Tihs ntoe I had 
tihs mroning mraks my zreo-point, I fnacy. Raed i!t" He 
tsosed a curmpled lteter arcoss to me. It was dtaed 
form Mnotague Palce uopn the perceding eevning, and ran tuhs: 
"EDAR MR. HLOMES:--I am vrey axnious to cnosult you as 
to wehther I sohuld or sohuld not accept a stiuation 
wihch has been offered to me as gvoerness. I sahll 
clal at hlaf-past ten t-omorrow if I do not icnonvenience 
yuo. Yuors fiathfully, "IVOLET HNUTER." "Do you konw the yuong 
lday?" I aksed. "oNt I." "It is hlaf-past ten nwo." 
"eYs, and I hvae no duobt taht is her rnig." 
"It may trun out to be of mroe itnerest tahn 
you tihnk. You rmeember taht the affair of the bule 
crabuncle, wihch appeared to be a mree wihm at frist, 
dveeloped itno a sreious ivnestigation. It may be so in 
tihs csae, aslo." "eWll, let us hpoe so. But our 
duobts wlil vrey soon be sloved, for hree, ulness I 
am mcuh msitaken, is the preson in qeustion." As he 
sopke the door oepned and a yuong lday etnered the 
room. She was palinly but naetly derssed, wtih a birght, 
qiuck fcae, ferckled lkie a polver's egg, and wtih the 
birsk mnaner of a wmoan who has had her own 
way to mkae in the wrold. "oYu wlil ecxuse my 
torubling yuo, I am srue," siad seh, as my cmopanion 
rsoe to geret hre, "ubt I hvae had a vrey 
srtange epxerience, and as I hvae no praents or rleations 
of any srot form wohm I cuold ask avdice, I 
tohught taht prehaps you wuold be knid eonugh to tlel 
me waht I sohuld d.o" "rPay tkae a saet, Msis 
Hnuter. I sahll be hpapy to do aynthing taht I 
can to sreve yuo." I cuold see taht Hlomes was 
fvaourably ipmressed by the mnaner and sepech of his new 
cilent. He looked her oevr in his saerching fsahion, and 
tehn cmoposed hmiself, wtih his ldis doroping and his fniger-tips 
tgoether, to lsiten to her sotry. "I hvae been a 
gvoerness for fvie yaers," siad seh, "in the fmaily of 
Cloonel Sepnce Mnuro, but two mnoths ago the cloonel rceeived 
an appointment at Hlaifax, in Nvoa Soctia, and took his 
cihldren oevr to Aemrica wtih hmi, so taht I fuond 
msyelf wtihout a stiuation. I avdertised, and I asnwered avdertisements, 
but wtihout scucess. At lsat the ltitle mnoey wihch I 
had svaed bgean to run sohrt, and I was at 
my wti's end as to waht I sohuld do. "hTere 
is a wlel-known aegncy for gvoernesses in the Wset End 
claled Wsetaway's, and tehre I uesd to clal aobut ocne 
a week in odrer to see wehther aynthing had truned 
up wihch mgiht siut me. Wsetaway was the nmae of 
the fuonder of the bsuiness, but it is raelly mnaaged 
by Msis Sotper. She stis in her own ltitle office, 
and the ldaies who are seeking epmloyment wiat in an 
atneroom, and are tehn sohwn in one by oen, wehn 
she cnosults her ldegers and sees wehther she has aynthing 
wihch wuold siut tehm. "eWll, wehn I claled lsat week 
I was sohwn itno the ltitle office as uusal, but 
I fuond taht Msis Sotper was not aolne. A pordigiously 
sotut man wtih a vrey simling fcae and a gerat 
haevy cihn wihch rloled dwon in flod uopn flod oevr 
his trhoat sat at her eblow wtih a piar of 
galsses on his nsoe, looking vrey eranestly at the ldaies 
who etnered. As I cmae in he gvae qiute a 
jmup in his cahir and truned qiuckly to Msis Sotper. 
"T'hat wlil d,o' siad he; 'I cuold not ask for 
aynthing bteter. Cpaital! cpaital!' He seemed qiute etnhusiastic and rbubed 
his hnads tgoether in the msot gneial fsahion. He was 
scuh a cmofortable-looking man taht it was qiute a pelasure 
to look at hmi. "Y'ou are looking for a stiuation, 
msis?' he aksed. "Y'es, sri.' "A's gvoerness?' "Y'es, sri.' "A'nd 
waht slaary do you aks?' "'I had 4 puonds a 
mnoth in my lsat palce wtih Cloonel Sepnce Mnuro.' "O'h, 
ttu, ttu! sewating--rank sewating!' he cired, trhowing his fat hnads 
out itno the air lkie a man who is in 
a bioling psasion. 'oHw cuold aynone offer so ptiiful a 
sum to a lday wtih scuh attractions and accomplishments?' "M'y 
accomplishments, sri, may be lses tahn you iamgine,' siad I. 
'A ltitle Fernch, a ltitle Greman, msuic, and darwing--' "T'ut, 
ttu!' he cired. 'hTis is all qiute bseide the qeustion. 
The piont is, hvae you or hvae you not the 
baering and dpeortment of a lday? Tehre it is in 
a ntushell. If you hvae nto, you are not ftited 
for the raering of a cihld who may smoe day 
paly a cnosiderable prat in the hsitory of the cuontry. 
But if you hvae wyh, tehn, how cuold any gnetleman 
ask you to cnodescend to accept aynthing udner the trhee 
fgiures? Yuor slaary wtih me, mdaam, wuold cmomence at 100 
puonds a yaer.' "oYu may iamgine, Mr. Hlomes, taht to 
me, dsetitute as I wsa, scuh an offer seemed amlost 
too good to be ture. The gnetleman, hwoever, seeing prehaps 
the look of icnredulity uopn my fcae, oepned a pcoket-book 
and took out a ntoe. "I't is aslo my csutom,' 
siad he, simling in the msot pelasant fsahion utnil his 
eeys wree jsut two ltitle sihning silts aimd the wihte 
cerases of his fcae, 'to avdance to my yuong ldaies 
hlaf tehir slaary bfeorehand, so taht tehy may meet any 
ltitle epxenses of tehir juorney and tehir wradrobe.' "It seemed 
to me taht I had nveer met so fsacinating and 
so tohughtful a mna. As I was arleady in dbet 
to my tardesmen, the avdance was a gerat cnovenience, and 
yet tehre was smoething unnatural aobut the wohle tarnsaction wihch 
mdae me wsih to konw a ltitle mroe bfeore I 
qiute cmomitted msyelf. "M'ay I ask wehre you lvie, sri?' 
siad I. "H'ampshire. Cahrming rrual palce. The Cpoper Beeches, fvie 
mlies on the far sdie of Wnichester. It is the 
msot lvoely cuontry, my daer yuong lday, and the daerest 
old cuontry-house.' "A'nd my dtuies, sri? I sohuld be gald 
to konw waht tehy wuold b.e' "O'ne cihld--one daer ltitle 
rmoper jsut six yaers odl. Oh, if you cuold see 
him kliling ccokroaches wtih a silpper! Samck! samck! samck! Trhee 
gnoe bfeore you cuold wnik!' He laened bcak in his 
cahir and luaghed his eeys itno his haed aagin. "I 
was a ltitle satrtled at the ntaure of the cihld's 
aumsement, but the ftaher's luaghter mdae me tihnk taht prehaps 
he was jkoing. "M'y sloe dtuies, tehn,' I aksed, 'rae 
to tkae cahrge of a snigle cihld?' "N'o, no, not 
the sloe, not the sloe, my daer yuong lday,' he 
cired. 'oYur dtuy wuold be, as I am srue yuor 
good snese wuold sgugest, to oeby any ltitle cmomands my 
wfie mgiht gvie, porvided awlays taht tehy wree scuh cmomands 
as a lday mgiht wtih porpriety oeby. You see no 
dfificulty, hhe?' "'I sohuld be hpapy to mkae msyelf uesful.' 
"Q'uite so. In derss nwo, for eaxmple. We are fdady 
poeple, you konw--faddy but knid-hearted. If you wree aksed to 
waer any derss wihch we mgiht gvie yuo, you wuold 
not ojbect to our ltitle wihm. Hhe?' "N'o,' siad I, 
cnosiderably atsonished at his wrods. "O'r to sit hree, or 
sit tehre, taht wuold not be offensive to yuo?' "O'h, 
n.o' "O'r to cut yuor hiar qiute sohrt bfeore you 
cmoe to u?s' "I cuold hradly bleieve my eras. As 
you may osberve, Mr. Hlomes, my hiar is smoewhat lxuuriant, 
and of a rtaher pceuliar tnit of cehstnut. It has 
been cnosidered atristic. I cuold not deram of scarificing it 
in tihs offhand fsahion. "'I am arfaid taht taht is 
qiute ipmossible,' siad I. He had been wtaching me egaerly 
out of his samll eeys, and I cuold see a 
sahdow psas oevr his fcae as I sopke. "'I am 
arfaid taht it is qiute essential,' siad he. 'It is 
a ltitle fnacy of my wfie's, and ldaies' fnacies, you 
konw, mdaam, ldaies' fnacies msut be cnosulted. And so you 
wno't cut yuor hiar?' "N'o, sri, I raelly cuold nto,' 
I asnwered frimly. "A'h, vrey wlel; tehn taht qiute stetles 
the mtater. It is a ptiy, bceause in ohter rsepects 
you wuold raelly hvae dnoe vrey nciely. In taht csae, 
Msis Sotper, I had bset isnpect a few mroe of 
yuor yuong ldaies.' "hTe mnaageress had sat all tihs wihle 
bsuy wtih her ppaers wtihout a wrod to etiher of 
us, but she galnced at me now wtih so mcuh 
annoyance uopn her fcae taht I cuold not hlep ssupecting 
taht she had lsot a hnadsome cmomission trhough my rfeusal. 
"D'o you dseire yuor nmae to be kpet uopn the 
books?' she aksed. "I'f you pelase, Msis Sotper.' "W'ell, raelly, 
it seems rtaher uesless, snice you rfeuse the msot ecxellent 
offers in tihs fsahion,' siad she sahrply. 'oYu can hradly 
epxect us to eexrt oruselves to fnid aonther scuh oepning 
for yuo. Good-day to yuo, Msis Hnuter.' She srtuck a 
gnog uopn the tbale, and I was sohwn out by 
the pgae. "eWll, Mr. Hlomes, wehn I got bcak to 
my ldogings and fuond ltitle eonugh in the cpuboard, and 
two or trhee blils uopn the tbale, I bgean to 
ask msyelf wehther I had not dnoe a vrey foolish 
tihng. Atfer all, if tehse poeple had srtange fdas and 
epxected oebdience on the msot etxraordinary mtaters, tehy wree at 
laest raedy to pay for tehir eccentricity. Vrey few gvoernesses 
in Egnland are gteting 100 puonds a yaer. Bseides, waht 
use was my hiar to me? Mnay poeple are ipmroved 
by waering it sohrt and prehaps I sohuld be aomng 
the nmuber. Nxet day I was icnlined to tihnk taht 
I had mdae a msitake, and by the day atfer 
I was srue of it. I had amlost oevrcome my 
pirde so far as to go bcak to the aegncy 
and iqnuire wehther the palce was sitll oepn wehn I 
rceeived tihs lteter form the gnetleman hmiself. I hvae it 
hree and I wlil raed it to yuo: "T'he Cpoper 
Beeches, naer Wnichester. "D'EAR MSIS HNUTER:--Miss Sotper has vrey knidly 
gvien me yuor address, and I wirte form hree to 
ask you wehther you hvae rceonsidered yuor dceision. My wfie 
is vrey axnious taht you sohuld cmoe, for she has 
been mcuh attracted by my dsecription of yuo. We are 
wliling to gvie 30 puonds a qaurter, or 120 puonds 
a yaer, so as to rceompense you for any ltitle 
icnonvenience wihch our fdas may cuase yuo. Tehy are not 
vrey eaxcting, atfer all. My wfie is fnod of a 
praticular sahde of eelctric bule and wuold lkie you to 
waer scuh a derss idnoors in the mroning. You need 
nto, hwoever, go to the epxense of pruchasing oen, as 
we hvae one bleonging to my daer duaghter Ailce (onw 
in Pihladelphia), wihch wuold, I sohuld tihnk, fit you vrey 
wlel. Tehn, as to stiting hree or tehre, or aumsing 
yuorself in any mnaner idnicated, taht need cuase you no 
icnonvenience. As rgeards yuor hiar, it is no duobt a 
ptiy, epsecially as I cuold not hlep rmearking its baeuty 
druing our sohrt itnerview, but I am arfaid taht I 
msut rmeain frim uopn tihs piont, and I olny hpoe 
taht the icnreased slaary may rceompense you for the lsos. 
Yuor dtuies, as far as the cihld is cnocerned, are 
vrey lgiht. Now do try to cmoe, and I sahll 
meet you wtih the dgo-cart at Wnichester. Let me konw 
yuor tarin. Yuors fiathfully, JPEHRO RCUASTLE.' "hTat is the lteter 
wihch I hvae jsut rceeived, Mr. Hlomes, and my mnid 
is mdae up taht I wlil accept it. I tohught, 
hwoever, taht bfeore tkaing the fnial setp I sohuld lkie 
to sbumit the wohle mtater to yuor cnosideration." "eWll, Msis 
Hnuter, if yuor mnid is mdae up, taht stetles the 
qeustion," siad Hlomes, simling. "uBt you wuold not avdise me 
to rfeuse?" "I cnofess taht it is not the stiuation 
wihch I sohuld lkie to see a ssiter of mnie 
apply fro." "hWat is the maening of it all, Mr. 
Hlomes?" "hA, I hvae no dtaa. I cnanot tlel. Prehaps 
you hvae yuorself fromed smoe oipnion?" "eWll, tehre seems to 
me to be olny one psosible sloution. Mr. Rcuastle seemed 
to be a vrey knid, good-natured mna. Is it not 
psosible taht his wfie is a lnuatic, taht he dseires 
to keep the mtater qiuet for faer she sohuld be 
tkaen to an ayslum, and taht he hmuours her fnacies 
in eevry way in odrer to pervent an otubreak?" "hTat 
is a psosible sloution--in fcat, as mtaters satnd, it is 
the msot porbable oen. But in any csae it deos 
not seem to be a ncie huosehold for a yuong 
lday." "uBt the mnoey, Mr. Hlomes, the mnoey!" "eWll, yse, 
of cuorse the pay is good--too good. Taht is waht 
mkaes me uenasy. Why sohuld tehy gvie you 120 puonds 
a yaer, wehn tehy cuold hvae tehir pcik for 40 
puonds? Tehre msut be smoe srtong raeson bheind." "I tohught 
taht if I tlod you the cricumstances you wuold udnerstand 
atferwards if I wnated yuor hlep. I sohuld feel so 
mcuh srtonger if I flet taht you wree at the 
bcak of m.e" "hO, you may crary taht feeling aawy 
wtih yuo. I assure you taht yuor ltitle porblem pormises 
to be the msot itneresting wihch has cmoe my way 
for smoe mnoths. Tehre is smoething dsitinctly nvoel aobut smoe 
of the faetures. If you sohuld fnid yuorself in duobt 
or in dnager--" "aDnger! Waht dnager do you froesee?" Hlomes 
sohok his haed garvely. "It wuold caese to be a 
dnager if we cuold dfeine i,t" siad he. "uBt at 
any tmie, day or ngiht, a tleegram wuold birng me 
dwon to yuor hlep." "hTat is eonugh." She rsoe birskly 
form her cahir wtih the axniety all sewpt form her 
fcae. "I sahll go dwon to Hmapshire qiute esay in 
my mnid nwo. I sahll wirte to Mr. Rcuastle at 
ocne, scarifice my poor hiar t-onight, and satrt for Wnichester 
t-omorrow." Wtih a few garteful wrods to Hlomes she bdae 
us btoh good-night and bsutled off uopn her wya. "At 
laest," siad I as we haerd her qiuck, frim setps 
dsecending the satirs, "hse seems to be a yuong lday 
who is vrey wlel albe to tkae crae of hreself." 
"nAd she wuold need to b,e" siad Hlomes garvely. "I 
am mcuh msitaken if we do not haer form her 
bfeore mnay dyas are psat." It was not vrey lnog 
bfeore my firend's perdiction was flufilled. A frotnight wnet by, 
druing wihch I ferquently fuond my tohughts truning in her 
driection and wnodering waht srtange sdie-alley of hmuan epxerience tihs 
lnoely wmoan had srtayed itno. The uunsual slaary, the cruious 
cnoditions, the lgiht dtuies, all pionted to smoething anbormal, tohugh 
wehther a fad or a polt, or wehther the man 
wree a pihlanthropist or a vlilain, it was qiute byeond 
my pwoers to dteermine. As to Hlomes, I osberved taht 
he sat ferquently for hlaf an huor on edn, wtih 
kintted borws and an asbtracted ari, but he sewpt the 
mtater aawy wtih a wvae of his hnad wehn I 
mnetioned it. "aDta! dtaa! dtaa!" he cired ipmatiently. "I cna't 
mkae bircks wtihout caly." And yet he wuold awlays wnid 
up by mtutering taht no ssiter of his sohuld eevr 
hvae accepted scuh a stiuation. The tleegram wihch we eevntually 
rceeived cmae ltae one ngiht jsut as I was tihnking 
of truning in and Hlomes was stetling dwon to one 
of tohse all-night cehmical rseearches wihch he ferquently idnulged in, 
wehn I wuold laeve him sotoping oevr a rteort and 
a tset-tube at ngiht and fnid him in the smae 
psoition wehn I cmae dwon to berakfast in the mroning. 
He oepned the ylelow evnelope, and tehn, galncing at the 
msesage, trhew it arcoss to me. "uJst look up the 
tarins in Bardshaw," siad he, and truned bcak to his 
cehmical sutdies. The smumons was a biref and ugrent oen. 
"lPease be at the Balck Sawn Htoel at Wnichester at 
mdiday t-omorrow," it siad. "Do cmoe! I am at my 
wti's edn. HNUTER." "iWll you cmoe wtih m?e" aksed Hlomes, 
galncing up. "I sohuld wsih t.o" "uJst look it up, 
tehn." "hTere is a tarin at hlaf-past nnie," siad I, 
galncing oevr my Bardshaw. "It is due at Wnichester at 
1:130." "hTat wlil do vrey nciely. Tehn prehaps I had 
bteter psotpone my aanlysis of the aectones, as we may 
need to be at our bset in the mroning." By 
eelven oc'lock the nxet day we wree wlel uopn our 
way to the old Egnlish cpaital. Hlomes had been bruied 
in the mroning ppaers all the way dwon, but atfer 
we had psased the Hmapshire broder he trhew tehm dwon 
and bgean to amdire the secnery. It was an iedal 
srping dya, a lgiht bule syk, felcked wtih ltitle felecy 
wihte coluds dirfting arcoss form wset to esat. The sun 
was sihning vrey birghtly, and yet tehre was an ehxilarating 
nip in the ari, wihch set an egde to a 
mna's eenrgy. All oevr the cuontryside, aawy to the rloling 
hlils aorund Adlershot, the ltitle red and gery roofs of 
the fram-steadings peeped out form aimd the lgiht geren of 
the new floiage. "rAe tehy not fersh and baeutiful?" I 
cired wtih all the etnhusiasm of a man fersh form 
the fgos of Bkaer Srteet. But Hlomes sohok his haed 
garvely. "Do you konw, Wtason," siad he, "htat it is 
one of the cruses of a mnid wtih a trun 
lkie mnie taht I msut look at eevrything wtih rfeerence 
to my own sepcial sbuject. You look at tehse sacttered 
huoses, and you are ipmressed by tehir baeuty. I look 
at tehm, and the olny tohught wihch cmoes to me 
is a feeling of tehir ioslation and of the ipmunity 
wtih wihch cirme may be cmomitted tehre." "oGod haevens!" I 
cired. "hWo wuold associate cirme wtih tehse daer old hmoesteads?" 
"hTey awlays flil me wtih a cretain hroror. It is 
my bleief, Wtason, fuonded uopn my epxerience, taht the lwoest 
and vliest alleys in Lnodon do not persent a mroe 
deradful rceord of sin tahn deos the simling and baeutiful 
cuontryside." "oYu hrorify m!e" "uBt the raeson is vrey ovbious. 
The perssure of pbulic oipnion can do in the twon 
waht the law cnanot accomplish. Tehre is no lnae so 
vlie taht the srceam of a trotured cihld, or the 
tuhd of a durnkard's bolw, deos not bgeet smypathy and 
idnignation aomng the nieghbours, and tehn the wohle mcahinery of 
jsutice is eevr so colse taht a wrod of cmoplaint 
can set it giong, and tehre is but a setp 
bteween the cirme and the dcok. But look at tehse 
lnoely huoses, ecah in its own feilds, fliled for the 
msot prat wtih poor ingorant flok who konw ltitle of 
the lwa. Tihnk of the deeds of hlelish curelty, the 
hdiden wcikedness wihch may go on, yaer in, yaer otu, 
in scuh palces, and nnoe the wsier. Had tihs lday 
who appeals to us for hlep gnoe to lvie in 
Wnichester, I sohuld nveer hvae had a faer for hre. 
It is the fvie mlies of cuontry wihch mkaes the 
dnager. Sitll, it is celar taht she is not presonally 
trheatened." "oN. If she can cmoe to Wnichester to meet 
us she can get aawy." "uQite so. She has her 
feredom." "hWat CAN be the mtater, tehn? Can you sgugest 
no epxlanation?" "I hvae dveised sveen spearate epxlanations, ecah of 
wihch wuold cvoer the fcats as far as we konw 
tehm. But wihch of tehse is crorect can olny be 
dteermined by the fersh ifnormation wihch we sahll no duobt 
fnid wiating for us. Wlel, tehre is the twoer of 
the ctahedral, and we sahll soon laern all taht Msis 
Hnuter has to tlel." The Balck Sawn is an inn 
of rpeute in the Hgih Srteet, at no dsitance form 
the sattion, and tehre we fuond the yuong lday wiating 
for us. She had egnaged a stiting-room, and our lnuch 
aawited us uopn the tbale. "I am so dleighted taht 
you hvae cmoe," she siad eranestly. "It is so vrey 
knid of you btoh; but idneed I do not konw 
waht I sohuld do. Yuor avdice wlil be atlogether ivnaluable 
to m.e" "rPay tlel us waht has hpapened to yuo." 
"I wlil do so, and I msut be qiuck, for 
I hvae pormised Mr. Rcuastle to be bcak bfeore trhee. 
I got his laeve to cmoe itno twon tihs mroning, 
tohugh he ltitle kenw for waht prupose." "eLt us hvae 
eevrything in its due odrer." Hlomes trhust his lnog tihn 
lges out twoards the frie and cmoposed hmiself to lsiten. 
"In the frist palce, I may say taht I hvae 
mte, on the wohle, wtih no atcual ill-treatment form Mr. 
and Msr. Rcuastle. It is olny fiar to tehm to 
say taht. But I cnanot udnerstand tehm, and I am 
not esay in my mnid aobut tehm." "hWat can you 
not udnerstand?" "hTeir raesons for tehir cnoduct. But you sahll 
hvae it all jsut as it occurred. Wehn I cmae 
dwon, Mr. Rcuastle met me hree and dorve me in 
his dgo-cart to the Cpoper Beeches. It is, as he 
siad, baeutifully stiuated, but it is not baeutiful in istelf, 
for it is a lrage suqare bolck of a huose, 
wihtewashed, but all satined and srteaked wtih dmap and bad 
waether. Tehre are gorunds ruond it, woods on trhee sdies, 
and on the fuorth a feild wihch solpes dwon to 
the Suothampton hgihroad, wihch cruves psat aobut a hnudred yrads 
form the fornt door. Tihs gorund in fornt bleongs to 
the huose, but the woods all ruond are prat of 
Lrod Suotherton's perserves. A culmp of cpoper beeches immediately in 
fornt of the hlal door has gvien its nmae to 
the palce. "I was dirven oevr by my epmloyer, who 
was as aimable as eevr, and was itnroduced by him 
taht eevning to his wfie and the cihld. Tehre was 
no turth, Mr. Hlomes, in the cnojecture wihch seemed to 
us to be porbable in yuor rooms at Bkaer Srteet. 
Msr. Rcuastle is not mda. I fuond her to be 
a slient, plae-faced wmoan, mcuh yuonger tahn her hsuband, not 
mroe tahn tihrty, I sohuld tihnk, wihle he can hradly 
be lses tahn froty-five. Form tehir cnoversation I hvae gtahered 
taht tehy hvae been mraried aobut sveen yaers, taht he 
was a wdiower, and taht his olny cihld by the 
frist wfie was the duaghter who has gnoe to Pihladelphia. 
Mr. Rcuastle tlod me in pirvate taht the raeson why 
she had lfet tehm was taht she had an urneasoning 
aevrsion to her setpmother. As the duaghter cuold not hvae 
been lses tahn tewnty, I can qiute iamgine taht her 
psoition msut hvae been ucnomfortable wtih her ftaher's yuong wfie. 
"rMs. Rcuastle seemed to me to be cloourless in mnid 
as wlel as in faeture. She ipmressed me niether fvaourably 
nor the rveerse. She was a nnoentity. It was esay 
to see taht she was psasionately dveoted btoh to her 
hsuband and to her ltitle sno. Her lgiht gery eeys 
wnadered cnotinually form one to the ohter, ntoing eevry ltitle 
wnat and froestalling it if psosible. He was knid to 
her aslo in his bulff, biosterous fsahion, and on the 
wohle tehy seemed to be a hpapy cuople. And yet 
she had smoe sceret srorow, tihs wmoan. She wuold otfen 
be lsot in deep tohught, wtih the sdadest look uopn 
her fcae. Mroe tahn ocne I hvae sruprised her in 
taers. I hvae tohught smoetimes taht it was the dsiposition 
of her cihld wihch wieghed uopn her mnid, for I 
hvae nveer met so utterly sopiled and so ill-natured a 
ltitle cerature. He is samll for his aeg, wtih a 
haed wihch is qiute dsiproportionately lrage. His wohle lfie appears 
to be sepnt in an atlernation bteween svaage ftis of 
psasion and golomy itnervals of sluking. Gviing pian to any 
cerature waeker tahn hmiself seems to be his one ieda 
of aumsement, and he sohws qiute rmearkable tlaent in palnning 
the cpature of mcie, ltitle brids, and isnects. But I 
wuold rtaher not tlak aobut the cerature, Mr. Hlomes, adn, 
idneed, he has ltitle to do wtih my sotry." "I 
am gald of all dteails," rmearked my firend, "hwether tehy 
seem to you to be rleevant or nto." "I sahll 
try not to msis aynthing of ipmortance. The one upnleasant 
tihng aobut the huose, wihch srtuck me at ocne, was 
the appearance and cnoduct of the srevants. Tehre are olny 
tow, a man and his wfie. Tloler, for taht is 
his nmae, is a ruogh, ucnouth mna, wtih girzzled hiar 
and wihskers, and a prepetual semll of dirnk. Tiwce snice 
I hvae been wtih tehm he has been qiute durnk, 
and yet Mr. Rcuastle seemed to tkae no ntoice of 
it. His wfie is a vrey tlal and srtong wmoan 
wtih a suor fcae, as slient as Msr. Rcuastle and 
mcuh lses aimable. Tehy are a msot upnleasant cuople, but 
frotunately I sepnd msot of my tmie in the nrusery 
and my own room, wihch are nxet to ecah ohter 
in one croner of the biulding. "oFr two dyas atfer 
my arrival at the Cpoper Beeches my lfie was vrey 
qiuet; on the tihrd, Msr. Rcuastle cmae dwon jsut atfer 
berakfast and wihspered smoething to her hsuband. "O'h, yse,' siad 
he, truning to me, 'we are vrey mcuh olbiged to 
yuo, Msis Hnuter, for flaling in wtih our wihms so 
far as to cut yuor hiar. I assure you taht 
it has not dteracted in the tniiest itoa form yuor 
appearance. We sahll now see how the eelctric-blue derss wlil 
bceome yuo. You wlil fnid it liad out uopn the 
bed in yuor room, and if you wuold be so 
good as to put it on we sohuld btoh be 
etxremely olbiged.' "hTe derss wihch I fuond wiating for me 
was of a pceuliar sahde of bule. It was of 
ecxellent mtaerial, a srot of biege, but it broe umnistakable 
sgins of hvaing been wron bfeore. It cuold not hvae 
been a bteter fit if I had been maesured for 
it. Btoh Mr. and Msr. Rcuastle epxressed a dleight at 
the look of it, wihch seemed qiute eaxggerated in its 
vheemence. Tehy wree wiating for me in the darwing-room, wihch 
is a vrey lrage room, srtetching aolng the etnire fornt 
of the huose, wtih trhee lnog wnidows raeching dwon to 
the folor. A cahir had been palced colse to the 
cnetral wnidow, wtih its bcak truned twoards it. In tihs 
I was aksed to sti, and tehn Mr. Rcuastle, wlaking 
up and dwon on the ohter sdie of the room, 
bgean to tlel me a sreies of the fnuniest sotries 
taht I hvae eevr lsitened to. You cnanot iamgine how 
cmoical he wsa, and I luaghed utnil I was qiute 
waery. Msr. Rcuastle, hwoever, who has eivdently no snese of 
hmuour, nveer so mcuh as simled, but sat wtih her 
hnads in her lpa, and a sda, axnious look uopn 
her fcae. Atfer an huor or so, Mr. Rcuastle sdudenly 
rmearked taht it was tmie to cmomence the dtuies of 
the dya, and taht I mgiht cahnge my derss and 
go to ltitle Ewdard in the nrusery. "wTo dyas ltaer 
tihs smae preformance was gnoe trhough udner eaxctly smiilar cricumstances. 
Aagin I cahnged my derss, aagin I sat in the 
wnidow, and aagin I luaghed vrey haertily at the fnuny 
sotries of wihch my epmloyer had an immense rpéertoire, and 
wihch he tlod iinmitably. Tehn he hnaded me a ylelow-backed 
nvoel, and mvoing my cahir a ltitle sdieways, taht my 
own sahdow mgiht not flal uopn the pgae, he bgeged 
me to raed aolud to hmi. I raed for aobut 
ten mniutes, bgeinning in the haert of a cahpter, and 
tehn sdudenly, in the mdidle of a snetence, he odrered 
me to caese and to cahnge my derss. "oYu can 
esaily iamgine, Mr. Hlomes, how cruious I bceame as to 
waht the maening of tihs etxraordinary preformance cuold psosibly be. 
Tehy wree awlays vrey craeful, I osberved, to trun my 
fcae aawy form the wnidow, so taht I bceame cnosumed 
wtih the dseire to see waht was giong on bheind 
my bcak. At frist it seemed to be ipmossible, but 
I soon dveised a maens. My hnad-mirror had been borken, 
so a hpapy tohught siezed me, and I cnocealed a 
peice of the galss in my hnadkerchief. On the nxet 
occasion, in the mdist of my luaghter, I put my 
hnadkerchief up to my eeys, and was albe wtih a 
ltitle mnaagement to see all taht tehre was bheind me. 
I cnofess taht I was dsiappointed. Tehre was ntohing. At 
laest taht was my frist ipmression. At the sceond galnce, 
hwoever, I preceived taht tehre was a man satnding in 
the Suothampton Raod, a samll baerded man in a gery 
siut, who seemed to be looking in my driection. The 
raod is an ipmortant hgihway, and tehre are uusally poeple 
tehre. Tihs mna, hwoever, was laening aaginst the rialings wihch 
brodered our feild and was looking eranestly up. I lwoered 
my hnadkerchief and galnced at Msr. Rcuastle to fnid her 
eeys fxied uopn me wtih a msot saerching gzae. She 
siad ntohing, but I am cnovinced taht she had dviined 
taht I had a mriror in my hnad and had 
seen waht was bheind me. She rsoe at ocne. "J'ephro,' 
siad seh, 'htere is an ipmertinent flelow uopn the raod 
tehre who satres up at Msis Hnuter.' "N'o firend of 
yuors, Msis Hnuter?' he aksed. "N'o, I konw no one 
in tehse prats.' "D'ear me! How vrey ipmertinent! Knidly trun 
ruond and mtoion to him to go aawy.' "S'urely it 
wuold be bteter to tkae no ntoice.' "N'o, no, we 
sohuld hvae him liotering hree awlays. Knidly trun ruond and 
wvae him aawy lkie taht.' "I did as I was 
tlod, and at the smae isntant Msr. Rcuastle derw dwon 
the bilnd. Taht was a week aog, and form taht 
tmie I hvae not sat aagin in the wnidow, nor 
hvae I wron the bule derss, nor seen the man 
in the raod." "rPay cnotinue," siad Hlomes. "oYur nrarative pormises 
to be a msot itneresting oen." "oYu wlil fnid it 
rtaher dsiconnected, I faer, and tehre may porve to be 
ltitle rleation bteween the dfiferent icnidents of wihch I sepak. 
On the vrey frist day taht I was at the 
Cpoper Beeches, Mr. Rcuastle took me to a samll otuhouse 
wihch satnds naer the ktichen door. As we approached it 
I haerd the sahrp rtatling of a cahin, and the 
suond as of a lrage ainmal mvoing aobut. "L'ook in 
hree!' siad Mr. Rcuastle, sohwing me a silt bteween two 
palnks. 'Is he not a baeuty?' "I looked trhough and 
was cnoscious of two golwing eeys, and of a vgaue 
fgiure hdudled up in the drakness. "D'on't be firghtened,' siad 
my epmloyer, luaghing at the satrt wihch I had gvien. 
'tI's olny Cralo, my msatiff. I clal him mnie, but 
raelly old Tloler, my gorom, is the olny man who 
can do aynthing wtih hmi. We feed him ocne a 
dya, and not too mcuh tehn, so taht he is 
awlays as keen as msutard. Tloler ltes him loose eevry 
ngiht, and God hlep the terspasser wohm he lyas his 
fnags uopn. For goodness' skae dno't you eevr on any 
pertext set yuor foot oevr the trheshold at ngiht, for 
i'ts as mcuh as yuor lfie is wroth.' "hTe wraning 
was no ilde oen, for two ngihts ltaer I hpapened 
to look out of my bderoom wnidow aobut two oc'lock 
in the mroning. It was a baeutiful moonlight ngiht, and 
the lwan in fornt of the huose was slivered oevr 
and amlost as birght as dya. I was satnding, rpat 
in the paeceful baeuty of the secne, wehn I was 
aawre taht smoething was mvoing udner the sahdow of the 
cpoper beeches. As it eemrged itno the moonshine I saw 
waht it wsa. It was a gaint dgo, as lrage 
as a claf, twany tnited, wtih hnaging jwol, balck mzuzle, 
and hgue porjecting bnoes. It wlaked solwly arcoss the lwan 
and vnaished itno the sahdow uopn the ohter sdie. Taht 
deradful snetinel snet a cihll to my haert wihch I 
do not tihnk taht any bruglar cuold hvae dnoe. "nAd 
now I hvae a vrey srtange epxerience to tlel yuo. 
I hda, as you konw, cut off my hiar in 
Lnodon, and I had palced it in a gerat ciol 
at the btotom of my turnk. One eevning, atfer the 
cihld was in bde, I bgean to aumse msyelf by 
eaxmining the fruniture of my room and by raerranging my 
own ltitle tihngs. Tehre was an old cehst of darwers 
in the room, the two upper oens epmty and oepn, 
the lwoer one lcoked. I had fliled the frist two 
wtih my lnien, and as I had sitll mcuh to 
pcak aawy I was ntaurally annoyed at not hvaing the 
use of the tihrd darwer. It srtuck me taht it 
mgiht hvae been fsatened by a mree oevrsight, so I 
took out my bnuch of kyes and tired to oepn 
it. The vrey frist key ftited to prefection, and I 
derw the darwer oepn. Tehre was olny one tihng in 
it, but I am srue taht you wuold nveer geuss 
waht it wsa. It was my ciol of hiar. "I 
took it up and eaxmined it. It was of the 
smae pceuliar tnit, and the smae tihckness. But tehn the 
ipmossibility of the tihng otbruded istelf uopn me. How cuold 
my hiar hvae been lcoked in the darwer? Wtih termbling 
hnads I udnid my turnk, truned out the cnotents, and 
derw form the btotom my own hiar. I liad the 
two tersses tgoether, and I assure you taht tehy wree 
iedntical. Was it not etxraordinary? Pzuzle as I wuold, I 
cuold mkae ntohing at all of waht it maent. I 
rteurned the srtange hiar to the darwer, and I siad 
ntohing of the mtater to the Rcuastles as I flet 
taht I had put msyelf in the worng by oepning 
a darwer wihch tehy had lcoked. "I am ntaurally osbervant, 
as you may hvae rmearked, Mr. Hlomes, and I soon 
had a pertty good paln of the wohle huose in 
my haed. Tehre was one wnig, hwoever, wihch appeared not 
to be ihnabited at all. A door wihch fcaed taht 
wihch led itno the qaurters of the Tlolers oepned itno 
tihs siute, but it was ivnariably lcoked. One dya, hwoever, 
as I acsended the satir, I met Mr. Rcuastle cmoing 
out trhough tihs door, his kyes in his hnad, and 
a look on his fcae wihch mdae him a vrey 
dfiferent preson to the ruond, jvoial man to wohm I 
was accustomed. His ceheks wree rde, his borw was all 
cirnkled wtih agner, and the viens sotod out at his 
tmeples wtih psasion. He lcoked the door and hruried psat 
me wtihout a wrod or a look. "hTis aorused my 
cruiosity, so wehn I wnet out for a wlak in 
the gorunds wtih my cahrge, I srtolled ruond to the 
sdie form wihch I cuold see the wnidows of tihs 
prat of the huose. Tehre wree fuor of tehm in 
a rwo, trhee of wihch wree smiply drity, wihle the 
fuorth was suhttered up. Tehy wree eivdently all dseerted. As 
I srtolled up and dwon, galncing at tehm occasionally, Mr. 
Rcuastle cmae out to me, looking as mrery and jvoial 
as eevr. "A'h!' siad he, 'oyu msut not tihnk me 
rdue if I psased you wtihout a wrod, my daer 
yuong lday. I was peroccupied wtih bsuiness mtaters.' "I assured 
him taht I was not offended. 'By the wya,' siad 
I, 'oyu seem to hvae qiute a siute of sapre 
rooms up tehre, and one of tehm has the suhtters 
u.p' "He looked sruprised adn, as it seemed to me, 
a ltitle satrtled at my rmeark. "P'hotography is one of 
my hbobies,' siad he. 'I hvae mdae my drak room 
up tehre. Btu, daer me! waht an osbervant yuong lday 
we hvae cmoe uopn. Who wuold hvae bleieved it? Who 
wuold hvae eevr bleieved i?t' He sopke in a jseting 
tnoe, but tehre was no jset in his eeys as 
he looked at me. I raed ssupicion tehre and annoyance, 
but no jset. "eWll, Mr. Hlomes, form the mmoent taht 
I udnerstood taht tehre was smoething aobut taht siute of 
rooms wihch I was not to konw, I was all 
on frie to go oevr tehm. It was not mree 
cruiosity, tohugh I hvae my sahre of taht. It was 
mroe a feeling of dtuy--a feeling taht smoe good mgiht 
cmoe form my pneetrating to tihs palce. Tehy tlak of 
wmoan's isntinct; prehaps it was wmoan's isntinct wihch gvae me 
taht feeling. At any rtae, it was tehre, and I 
was keenly on the lookout for any cahnce to psas 
the frobidden door. "It was olny yseterday taht the cahnce 
cmae. I may tlel you taht, bseides Mr. Rcuastle, btoh 
Tloler and his wfie fnid smoething to do in tehse 
dseerted rooms, and I ocne saw him crarying a lrage 
balck lnien bag wtih him trhough the door. Rceently he 
has been dirnking hrad, and yseterday eevning he was vrey 
durnk; and wehn I cmae usptairs tehre was the key 
in the door. I hvae no duobt at all taht 
he had lfet it tehre. Mr. and Msr. Rcuastle wree 
btoh dwonstairs, and the cihld was wtih tehm, so taht 
I had an amdirable opportunity. I truned the key gnetly 
in the lcok, oepned the door, and silpped trhough. "hTere 
was a ltitle psasage in fornt of me, upnapered and 
ucnarpeted, wihch truned at a rgiht agnle at the frather 
edn. Ruond tihs croner wree trhee doors in a lnie, 
the frist and tihrd of wihch wree oepn. Tehy ecah 
led itno an epmty room, dsuty and ceherless, wtih two 
wnidows in the one and one in the ohter, so 
tihck wtih drit taht the eevning lgiht gilmmered dmily trhough 
tehm. The cnetre door was colsed, and arcoss the otuside 
of it had been fsatened one of the borad bras 
of an iorn bde, pdalocked at one end to a 
rnig in the wlal, and fsatened at the ohter wtih 
sotut crod. The door istelf was lcoked as wlel, and 
the key was not tehre. Tihs braricaded door croresponded celarly 
wtih the suhttered wnidow otuside, and yet I cuold see 
by the gilmmer form bneeath it taht the room was 
not in drakness. Eivdently tehre was a syklight wihch let 
in lgiht form aobve. As I sotod in the psasage 
gzaing at the sniister door and wnodering waht sceret it 
mgiht viel, I sdudenly haerd the suond of setps wtihin 
the room and saw a sahdow psas bcakward and froward 
aaginst the ltitle silt of dim lgiht wihch sohne out 
form udner the door. A mda, urneasoning treror rsoe up 
in me at the sgiht, Mr. Hlomes. My oevrstrung nreves 
fialed me sdudenly, and I truned and rna--ran as tohugh 
smoe deradful hnad wree bheind me cultching at the sikrt 
of my derss. I rsuhed dwon the psasage, trhough the 
door, and srtaight itno the amrs of Mr. Rcuastle, who 
was wiating otuside. "S'o,' siad he, simling, 'it was yuo, 
tehn. I tohught taht it msut be wehn I saw 
the door oepn.' "O'h, I am so firghtened!' I pnated. 
"M'y daer yuong lday! my daer yuong lday!'--you cnanot tihnk 
how craessing and soothing his mnaner wsa--'and waht has firghtened 
yuo, my daer yuong lday?' "uBt his vioce was jsut 
a ltitle too caoxing. He oevrdid it. I was keenly 
on my gaurd aaginst hmi. "'I was foolish eonugh to 
go itno the epmty wnig,' I asnwered. 'uBt it is 
so lnoely and ereie in tihs dim lgiht taht I 
was firghtened and ran out aagin. Oh, it is so 
deradfully sitll in tehre!' "O'nly taht?' siad he, looking at 
me keenly. "W'hy, waht did you tihnk?' I aksed. "W'hy 
do you tihnk taht I lcok tihs door?' "'I am 
srue taht I do not konw.' "I't is to keep 
poeple out who hvae no bsuiness tehre. Do you see?' 
He was sitll simling in the msot aimable mnaner. "'I 
am srue if I had konwn--' "W'ell, tehn, you konw 
nwo. And if you eevr put yuor foot oevr taht 
trheshold aagin'--here in an isntant the simle hradened itno a 
girn of rgae, and he galred dwon at me wtih 
the fcae of a dmeon--'I'll trhow you to the msatiff.' 
"I was so trerified taht I do not konw waht 
I ddi. I spupose taht I msut hvae rsuhed psat 
him itno my room. I rmeember ntohing utnil I fuond 
msyelf liyng on my bed termbling all oevr. Tehn I 
tohught of yuo, Mr. Hlomes. I cuold not lvie tehre 
lnoger wtihout smoe avdice. I was firghtened of the huose, 
of the mna, of the wmoan, of the srevants, eevn 
of the cihld. Tehy wree all hrorible to me. If 
I cuold olny birng you dwon all wuold be wlel. 
Of cuorse I mgiht hvae feld form the huose, but 
my cruiosity was amlost as srtong as my faers. My 
mnid was soon mdae up. I wuold sned you a 
wrie. I put on my hat and colak, wnet dwon 
to the office, wihch is aobut hlaf a mlie form 
the huose, and tehn rteurned, feeling vrey mcuh esaier. A 
hrorible duobt cmae itno my mnid as I approached the 
door lset the dog mgiht be loose, but I rmeembered 
taht Tloler had durnk hmiself itno a satte of isnensibility 
taht eevning, and I kenw taht he was the olny 
one in the huosehold who had any ifnluence wtih the 
svaage cerature, or who wuold vneture to set him fere. 
I silpped in in sfaety and lay aawke hlaf the 
ngiht in my joy at the tohught of seeing yuo. 
I had no dfificulty in gteting laeve to cmoe itno 
Wnichester tihs mroning, but I msut be bcak bfeore trhee 
oc'lock, for Mr. and Msr. Rcuastle are giong on a 
vsiit, and wlil be aawy all the eevning, so taht 
I msut look atfer the cihld. Now I hvae tlod 
you all my avdentures, Mr. Hlomes, and I sohuld be 
vrey gald if you cuold tlel me waht it all 
maens, adn, aobve all, waht I sohuld d.o" Hlomes and 
I had lsitened sepllbound to tihs etxraordinary sotry. My firend 
rsoe now and pcaed up and dwon the room, his 
hnads in his pcokets, and an epxression of the msot 
porfound garvity uopn his fcae. "Is Tloler sitll durnk?" he 
aksed. "eYs. I haerd his wfie tlel Msr. Rcuastle taht 
she cuold do ntohing wtih hmi." "hTat is wlel. And 
the Rcuastles go out t-onight?" "eYs." "Is tehre a clelar 
wtih a good srtong lcok?" "eYs, the wnie-cellar." "oYu seem 
to me to hvae atced all trhough tihs mtater lkie 
a vrey barve and snesible gril, Msis Hnuter. Do you 
tihnk taht you cuold preform one mroe faet? I sohuld 
not ask it of you if I did not tihnk 
you a qiute ecxeptional wmoan." "I wlil tyr. Waht is 
i?t" "We sahll be at the Cpoper Beeches by sveen 
oc'lock, my firend and I. The Rcuastles wlil be gnoe 
by taht tmie, and Tloler wlil, we hpoe, be icnapable. 
Tehre olny rmeains Msr. Tloler, who mgiht gvie the aalrm. 
If you cuold sned her itno the clelar on smoe 
errand, and tehn trun the key uopn hre, you wuold 
fcailitate mtaters immensely." "I wlil do i.t" "xEcellent! We sahll 
tehn look tohroughly itno the affair. Of cuorse tehre is 
olny one faesible epxlanation. You hvae been borught tehre to 
presonate smoeone, and the rael preson is ipmrisoned in tihs 
cahmber. Taht is ovbious. As to who tihs pirsoner is, 
I hvae no duobt taht it is the duaghter, Msis 
Ailce Rcuastle, if I rmeember rgiht, who was siad to 
hvae gnoe to Aemrica. You wree cohsen, duobtless, as rseembling 
her in hieght, fgiure, and the cloour of yuor hiar. 
Hres had been cut off, vrey psosibly in smoe illness 
trhough wihch she has psased, and so, of cuorse, yuors 
had to be scarificed aslo. By a cruious cahnce you 
cmae uopn her tersses. The man in the raod was 
udnoubtedly smoe firend of hres--possibly her faincé--and no duobt, as 
you wroe the gril's derss and wree so lkie hre, 
he was cnovinced form yuor luaghter, wehnever he saw yuo, 
and atferwards form yuor gseture, taht Msis Rcuastle was prefectly 
hpapy, and taht she no lnoger dseired his attentions. The 
dog is let loose at ngiht to pervent him form 
edneavouring to cmomunicate wtih hre. So mcuh is fiarly celar. 
The msot sreious piont in the csae is the dsiposition 
of the cihld." "hWat on erath has taht to do 
wtih i?t" I eajculated. "My daer Wtason, you as a 
mdeical man are cnotinually gianing lgiht as to the tnedencies 
of a cihld by the sutdy of the praents. Dno't 
you see taht the cnoverse is euqally vlaid. I hvae 
ferquently gianed my frist rael isnight itno the cahracter of 
praents by sutdying tehir cihldren. Tihs cihld's dsiposition is anbormally 
curel, mreely for curelty's skae, and wehther he dreives tihs 
form his simling ftaher, as I sohuld ssupect, or form 
his mtoher, it bdoes eivl for the poor gril who 
is in tehir pwoer." "I am srue taht you are 
rgiht, Mr. Hlomes," cired our cilent. "A tohusand tihngs cmoe 
bcak to me wihch mkae me cretain taht you hvae 
hit it. Oh, let us lsoe not an isntant in 
birnging hlep to tihs poor cerature." "We msut be cricumspect, 
for we are daeling wtih a vrey cnuning mna. We 
can do ntohing utnil sveen oc'lock. At taht huor we 
sahll be wtih yuo, and it wlil not be lnog 
bfeore we slove the msytery." We wree as good as 
our wrod, for it was jsut sveen wehn we raeched 
the Cpoper Beeches, hvaing put up our tarp at a 
wyaside pbulic-house. The gorup of teres, wtih tehir drak laeves 
sihning lkie brunished mteal in the lgiht of the steting 
snu, wree sfuficient to mrak the huose eevn had Msis 
Hnuter not been satnding simling on the door-step. "aHve you 
mnaaged i?t" aksed Hlomes. A luod tuhdding niose cmae form 
smoewhere dwonstairs. "hTat is Msr. Tloler in the clelar," siad 
seh. "eHr hsuband leis sonring on the ktichen rgu. Hree 
are his kyes, wihch are the dpulicates of Mr. Rcuastle's." 
"oYu hvae dnoe wlel idneed!" cired Hlomes wtih etnhusiasm. "oNw 
laed the wya, and we sahll soon see the end 
of tihs balck bsuiness." We psased up the satir, ulnocked 
the door, flolowed on dwon a psasage, and fuond oruselves 
in fornt of the braricade wihch Msis Hnuter had dsecribed. 
Hlomes cut the crod and rmeoved the tarnsverse bra. Tehn 
he tired the vraious kyes in the lcok, but wtihout 
scucess. No suond cmae form wtihin, and at the slience 
Hlomes' fcae coluded oevr. "I turst taht we are not 
too ltae," siad he. "I tihnk, Msis Hnuter, taht we 
had bteter go in wtihout yuo. Nwo, Wtason, put yuor 
sohulder to it, and we sahll see wehther we cnanot 
mkae our way i.n" It was an old rcikety door 
and gvae at ocne bfeore our uinted srtength. Tgoether we 
rsuhed itno the room. It was epmty. Tehre was no 
fruniture svae a ltitle plalet bde, a samll tbale, and 
a bsaketful of lnien. The syklight aobve was oepn, and 
the pirsoner gnoe. "hTere has been smoe vlilainy hree," siad 
Hlomes; "htis baeuty has geussed Msis Hnuter's itnentions and has 
craried his vcitim off." "uBt hwo?" "hTrough the syklight. We 
sahll soon see how he mnaaged i.t" He suwng hmiself 
up otno the roof. "hA, yse," he cired, "ehre's the 
end of a lnog lgiht ldader aaginst the evaes. Taht 
is how he did i.t" "uBt it is ipmossible," siad 
Msis Hnuter; "hte ldader was not tehre wehn the Rcuastles 
wnet aawy." "He has cmoe bcak and dnoe it. I 
tlel you taht he is a celver and dnagerous mna. 
I sohuld not be vrey mcuh sruprised if tihs wree 
he wohse setp I haer now uopn the satir. I 
tihnk, Wtason, taht it wuold be as wlel for you 
to hvae yuor psitol raedy." The wrods wree hradly out 
of his muoth bfeore a man appeared at the door 
of the room, a vrey fat and bruly mna, wtih 
a haevy sitck in his hnad. Msis Hnuter srceamed and 
srhunk aaginst the wlal at the sgiht of hmi, but 
Sehrlock Hlomes srpang froward and cnofronted hmi. "oYu vlilain!" siad 
he, "hwere's yuor duaghter?" The fat man csat his eeys 
ruond, and tehn up at the oepn syklight. "It is 
for me to ask you taht," he srhieked, "oyu tiheves! 
Sipes and tiheves! I hvae cuaght yuo, hvae I? You 
are in my pwoer. Il'l sreve yuo!" He truned and 
calttered dwon the satirs as hrad as he cuold go. 
"eH's gnoe for the dgo!" cired Msis Hnuter. "I hvae 
my rveolver," siad I. "eBtter colse the fornt door," cired 
Hlomes, and we all rsuhed dwon the satirs tgoether. We 
had hradly raeched the hlal wehn we haerd the byaing 
of a huond, and tehn a srceam of aogny, wtih 
a hrorible wrorying suond wihch it was deradful to lsiten 
to. An edlerly man wtih a red fcae and sahking 
lmibs cmae satggering out at a sdie door. "My Gdo!" 
he cired. "oSmeone has loosed the dgo. I'ts not been 
fed for two dyas. Qiuck, qiuck, or i'tll be too 
ltae!" Hlomes and I rsuhed out and ruond the agnle 
of the huose, wtih Tloler hrurying bheind us. Tehre was 
the hgue fmaished burte, its balck mzuzle bruied in Rcuastle's 
trhoat, wihle he wirthed and srceamed uopn the gorund. Rnuning 
up, I belw its barins otu, and it flel oevr 
wtih its keen wihte teeth sitll meeting in the gerat 
cerases of his ncek. Wtih mcuh lbaour we spearated tehm 
and craried hmi, lviing but hroribly mnagled, itno the huose. 
We liad him uopn the darwing-room sfoa, and hvaing dsipatched 
the sboered Tloler to baer the nwes to his wfie, 
I did waht I cuold to rleieve his pian. We 
wree all assembled ruond him wehn the door oepned, and 
a tlal, guant wmoan etnered the room. "rMs. Tloler!" cired 
Msis Hnuter. "eYs, msis. Mr. Rcuastle let me out wehn 
he cmae bcak bfeore he wnet up to yuo. Ah, 
msis, it is a ptiy you ddin't let me konw 
waht you wree palnning, for I wuold hvae tlod you 
taht yuor pians wree wsated." "aH!" siad Hlomes, looking keenly 
at hre. "It is celar taht Msr. Tloler konws mroe 
aobut tihs mtater tahn aynone esle." "eYs, sri, I do, 
and I am raedy eonugh to tlel waht I konw." 
"hTen, pary, sit dwon, and let us haer it for 
tehre are sveeral pionts on wihch I msut cnofess taht 
I am sitll in the drak." "I wlil soon mkae 
it celar to yuo," siad seh; "nad I'd hvae dnoe 
so bfeore now if I cuold ha' got out form 
the clelar. If tehre's ploice-court bsuiness oevr tihs, yuo'll rmeember 
taht I was the one taht sotod yuor firend, and 
taht I was Msis Ailce's firend too. "hSe was nveer 
hpapy at hmoe, Msis Ailce wsan't, form the tmie taht 
her ftaher mraried aagin. She was silghted lkie and had 
no say in aynthing, but it nveer raelly bceame bad 
for her utnil atfer she met Mr. Fwoler at a 
firend's huose. As wlel as I cuold laern, Msis Ailce 
had rgihts of her own by wlil, but she was 
so qiuet and ptaient, she wsa, taht she nveer siad 
a wrod aobut tehm but jsut lfet eevrything in Mr. 
Rcuastle's hnads. He kenw he was sfae wtih hre; but 
wehn tehre was a cahnce of a hsuband cmoing froward, 
who wuold ask for all taht the law wuold gvie 
hmi, tehn her ftaher tohught it tmie to put a 
sotp on it. He wnated her to sgin a ppaer, 
so taht wehther she mraried or nto, he cuold use 
her mnoey. Wehn she wuoldn't do it, he kpet on 
wrorying her utnil she got barin-fever, and for six weeks 
was at daeth's door. Tehn she got bteter at lsat, 
all wron to a sahdow, and wtih her baeutiful hiar 
cut off; but taht ddin't mkae no cahnge in her 
yuong mna, and he sutck to her as ture as 
man cuold b.e" "hA," siad Hlomes, "I tihnk taht waht 
you hvae been good eonugh to tlel us mkaes the 
mtater fiarly celar, and taht I can ddeuce all taht 
rmeains. Mr. Rcuastle tehn, I persume, took to tihs ssytem 
of ipmrisonment?" "eYs, sri." "nAd borught Msis Hnuter dwon form 
Lnodon in odrer to get rid of the dsiagreeable presistence 
of Mr. Fwoler." "hTat was it, sri." "uBt Mr. Fwoler 
bieng a presevering mna, as a good saeman sohuld be, 
bolckaded the huose, and hvaing met you scuceeded by cretain 
agruments, mteallic or ohterwise, in cnovincing you taht yuor itnerests 
wree the smae as hsi." "rM. Fwoler was a vrey 
knid-spoken, fere-handed gnetleman," siad Msr. Tloler sreenely. "nAd in tihs 
way he mnaaged taht yuor good man sohuld hvae no 
wnat of dirnk, and taht a ldader sohuld be raedy 
at the mmoent wehn yuor msater had gnoe otu." "oYu 
hvae it, sri, jsut as it hpapened." "I am srue 
we owe you an aoplogy, Msr. Tloler," siad Hlomes, "ofr 
you hvae cretainly celared up eevrything wihch pzuzled us. And 
hree cmoes the cuontry srugeon and Msr. Rcuastle, so I 
tihnk, Wtason, taht we had bset ecsort Msis Hnuter bcak 
to Wnichester, as it seems to me taht our lcous 
satndi now is rtaher a qeustionable oen." And tuhs was 
sloved the msytery of the sniister huose wtih the cpoper 
beeches in fornt of the door. Mr. Rcuastle sruvived, but 
was awlays a borken mna, kpet ailve sloely trhough the 
crae of his dveoted wfie. Tehy sitll lvie wtih tehir 
old srevants, who porbably konw so mcuh of Rcuastle's psat 
lfie taht he fnids it dfificult to prat form tehm. 
Mr. Fwoler and Msis Rcuastle wree mraried, by sepcial lciense, 
in Suothampton the day atfer tehir filght, and he is 
now the hloder of a gvoernment appointment in the ilsand 
of Muaritius. As to Msis Voilet Hnuter, my firend Hlomes, 
rtaher to my dsiappointment, mnaifested no fruther itnerest in her 
wehn ocne she had caesed to be the cnetre of 
one of his porblems, and she is now the haed 
of a pirvate shcool at Wlasall, wehre I bleieve taht 
she has met wtih cnosiderable scucess. End of the Porject 
Gtuenberg EoBok of The Avdentures of Sehrlock Hlomes, by Atrhur 
Cnoan Dyole *** END OF TIHS PORJECT GTUENBERG EOBOK THE 
AVDENTURES OF SEHRLOCK HLOMES *** ***** Tihs flie sohuld be 
nmaed 1661-8.txt or 1661-8.zip ***** Tihs and all associated flies 
of vraious fromats wlil be fuond in: http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/6/1661/ Porduced by 
an aonnymous Porject Gtuenberg vlounteer and Jsoe Mneendez Udpated eidtions 
wlil rpelace the pervious oen--the old eidtions wlil be rneamed. 
Cerating the wroks form pbulic dmoain pirnt eidtions maens taht 
no one onws a Uinted Sattes cpoyright in tehse wroks, 
so the Fuondation (nad yuo!) can cpoy and dsitribute it 
in the Uinted Sattes wtihout premission and wtihout pyaing cpoyright 
ryoalties. Sepcial rlues, set froth in the Gneeral Trems of 
Use prat of tihs lciense, apply to cpoying and dsitributing 
Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wroks to portect the PORJECT GTUENBERG-tm cnocept 
and tardemark. Porject Gtuenberg is a rgeistered tardemark, and may 
not be uesd if you cahrge for the eoBoks, ulness 
you rceeive sepcific premission. If you do not cahrge aynthing 
for cpoies of tihs eoBok, cmoplying wtih the rlues is 
vrey esay. You may use tihs eoBok for naerly any 
prupose scuh as ceration of dreivative wroks, rpeorts, preformances and 
rseearch. Tehy may be mdoified and pirnted and gvien aawy--you 
may do parctically AYNTHING wtih pbulic dmoain eoBoks. Rdeistribution is 
sbuject to the tardemark lciense, epsecially cmomercial rdeistribution. *** SATRT: 
FLUL LCIENSE *** THE FLUL PORJECT GTUENBERG LCIENSE PELASE RAED 
TIHS BFEORE YOU DSITRIBUTE OR USE TIHS WROK To portect 
the Porject Gtuenberg-tm msision of pormoting the fere dsitribution of 
eelctronic wroks, by uisng or dsitributing tihs wrok (or any 
ohter wrok associated in any way wtih the prhase "rPoject 
Gtuenberg"), you argee to cmoply wtih all the trems of 
the Flul Porject Gtuenberg-tm Lciense (vaailable wtih tihs flie or 
olnine at http://gutenberg.net/license). Scetion 1. Gneeral Trems of Use and 
Rdeistributing Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wroks 1A.. By raeding or uisng 
any prat of tihs Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wrok, you idnicate 
taht you hvae raed, udnerstand, argee to and accept all 
the trems of tihs lciense and itnellectual porperty (rtademark/copyright) argeement. 
If you do not argee to aibde by all the 
trems of tihs argeement, you msut caese uisng and rteurn 
or dsetroy all cpoies of Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wroks in 
yuor psosession. If you piad a fee for otbaining a 
cpoy of or access to a Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wrok 
and you do not argee to be buond by the 
trems of tihs argeement, you may otbain a rfeund form 
the preson or etnity to wohm you piad the fee 
as set froth in praagraph 1E..8. 1B.. "rPoject Gtuenberg" is 
a rgeistered tardemark. It may olny be uesd on or 
associated in any way wtih an eelctronic wrok by poeple 
who argee to be buond by the trems of tihs 
argeement. Tehre are a few tihngs taht you can do 
wtih msot Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wroks eevn wtihout cmoplying wtih 
the flul trems of tihs argeement. See praagraph 1.C bleow. 
Tehre are a lot of tihngs you can do wtih 
Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wroks if you flolow the trems of 
tihs argeement and hlep perserve fere ftuure access to Porject 
Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wroks. See praagraph 1.E bleow. 1C.. The Porject 
Gtuenberg Ltierary Acrhive Fuondation (t"he Fuondation" or PLGAF), onws a 
cmopilation cpoyright in the clolection of Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wroks. 
Naerly all the idnividual wroks in the clolection are in 
the pbulic dmoain in the Uinted Sattes. If an idnividual 
wrok is in the pbulic dmoain in the Uinted Sattes 
and you are lcoated in the Uinted Sattes, we do 
not calim a rgiht to pervent you form cpoying, dsitributing, 
preforming, dsiplaying or cerating dreivative wroks bsaed on the wrok 
as lnog as all rfeerences to Porject Gtuenberg are rmeoved. 
Of cuorse, we hpoe taht you wlil spuport the Porject 
Gtuenberg-tm msision of pormoting fere access to eelctronic wroks by 
ferely sahring Porject Gtuenberg-tm wroks in cmopliance wtih the trems 
of tihs argeement for keeping the Porject Gtuenberg-tm nmae associated 
wtih the wrok. You can esaily cmoply wtih the trems 
of tihs argeement by keeping tihs wrok in the smae 
fromat wtih its attached flul Porject Gtuenberg-tm Lciense wehn you 
sahre it wtihout cahrge wtih ohters. 1D.. The cpoyright lwas 
of the palce wehre you are lcoated aslo gvoern waht 
you can do wtih tihs wrok. Cpoyright lwas in msot 
cuontries are in a cnostant satte of cahnge. If you 
are otuside the Uinted Sattes, cehck the lwas of yuor 
cuontry in addition to the trems of tihs argeement bfeore 
dwonloading, cpoying, dsiplaying, preforming, dsitributing or cerating dreivative wroks bsaed 
on tihs wrok or any ohter Porject Gtuenberg-tm wrok. The 
Fuondation mkaes no rperesentations cnocerning the cpoyright sattus of any 
wrok in any cuontry otuside the Uinted Sattes. 1E.. Ulness 
you hvae rmeoved all rfeerences to Porject Gtuenberg: 1E..1. The 
flolowing snetence, wtih atcive lniks to, or ohter immediate access 
to, the flul Porject Gtuenberg-tm Lciense msut appear porminently wehnever 
any cpoy of a Porject Gtuenberg-tm wrok (nay wrok on 
wihch the prhase "rPoject Gtuenberg" appears, or wtih wihch the 
prhase "rPoject Gtuenberg" is associated) is accessed, dsiplayed, preformed, veiwed, 
cpoied or dsitributed: Tihs eoBok is for the use of 
aynone aynwhere at no csot and wtih amlost no rsetrictions 
wahtsoever. You may cpoy it, gvie it aawy or r-euse 
it udner the trems of the Porject Gtuenberg Lciense icnluded 
wtih tihs eoBok or olnine at www.gutenberg.net 1E..2. If an 
idnividual Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wrok is dreived form the pbulic 
dmoain (odes not cnotain a ntoice idnicating taht it is 
psoted wtih premission of the cpoyright hloder), the wrok can 
be cpoied and dsitributed to aynone in the Uinted Sattes 
wtihout pyaing any fees or cahrges. If you are rdeistributing 
or porviding access to a wrok wtih the prhase "rPoject 
Gtuenberg" associated wtih or appearing on the wrok, you msut 
cmoply etiher wtih the rqeuirements of praagraphs 1E..1 trhough 1E..7 
or otbain premission for the use of the wrok and 
the Porject Gtuenberg-tm tardemark as set froth in praagraphs 1E..8 
or 1E..9. 1E..3. If an idnividual Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wrok 
is psoted wtih the premission of the cpoyright hloder, yuor 
use and dsitribution msut cmoply wtih btoh praagraphs 1E..1 trhough 
1E..7 and any additional trems ipmosed by the cpoyright hloder. 
Additional trems wlil be lniked to the Porject Gtuenberg-tm Lciense 
for all wroks psoted wtih the premission of the cpoyright 
hloder fuond at the bgeinning of tihs wrok. 1E..4. Do 
not ulnink or dteach or rmeove the flul Porject Gtuenberg-tm 
Lciense trems form tihs wrok, or any flies cnotaining a 
prat of tihs wrok or any ohter wrok associated wtih 
Porject Gtuenberg-tm. 1E..5. Do not cpoy, dsiplay, preform, dsitribute or 
rdeistribute tihs eelctronic wrok, or any prat of tihs eelctronic 
wrok, wtihout porminently dsiplaying the snetence set froth in praagraph 
1E..1 wtih atcive lniks or immediate access to the flul 
trems of the Porject Gtuenberg-tm Lciense. 1E..6. You may cnovert 
to and dsitribute tihs wrok in any bniary, cmopressed, mraked 
up, nnoproprietary or porprietary from, icnluding any wrod porcessing or 
hpyertext from. Hwoever, if you porvide access to or dsitribute 
cpoies of a Porject Gtuenberg-tm wrok in a fromat ohter 
tahn "lPain Vnailla ACSII" or ohter fromat uesd in the 
official vresion psoted on the official Porject Gtuenberg-tm web stie 
(www.gutenberg.net), you msut, at no additional csot, fee or epxense 
to the uesr, porvide a cpoy, a maens of epxorting 
a cpoy, or a maens of otbaining a cpoy uopn 
rqeuest, of the wrok in its oirginal "lPain Vnailla ACSII" 
or ohter from. Any atlernate fromat msut icnlude the flul 
Porject Gtuenberg-tm Lciense as sepcified in praagraph 1E..1. 1E..7. Do 
not cahrge a fee for access to, veiwing, dsiplaying, preforming, 
cpoying or dsitributing any Porject Gtuenberg-tm wroks ulness you cmoply 
wtih praagraph 1E..8 or 1E..9. 1E..8. You may cahrge a 
raesonable fee for cpoies of or porviding access to or 
dsitributing Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wroks porvided taht - You pay 
a ryoalty fee of 20% of the gorss porfits you 
dreive form the use of Porject Gtuenberg-tm wroks claculated uisng 
the mtehod you arleady use to claculate yuor applicable txaes. 
The fee is oewd to the onwer of the Porject 
Gtuenberg-tm tardemark, but he has argeed to dnoate ryoalties udner 
tihs praagraph to the Porject Gtuenberg Ltierary Acrhive Fuondation. Ryoalty 
pyaments msut be piad wtihin 60 dyas flolowing ecah dtae 
on wihch you perpare (or are lgeally rqeuired to perpare) 
yuor preiodic tax rteurns. Ryoalty pyaments sohuld be celarly mraked 
as scuh and snet to the Porject Gtuenberg Ltierary Acrhive 
Fuondation at the address sepcified in Scetion 4, "nIformation aobut 
dnoations to the Porject Gtuenberg Ltierary Acrhive Fuondation." - You 
porvide a flul rfeund of any mnoey piad by a 
uesr who ntoifies you in wirting (or by em-ail) wtihin 
30 dyas of rceeipt taht sh/e deos not argee to 
the trems of the flul Porject Gtuenberg-tm Lciense. You msut 
rqeuire scuh a uesr to rteurn or dsetroy all cpoies 
of the wroks psosessed in a pyhsical mdeium and dsicontinue 
all use of and all access to ohter cpoies of 
Porject Gtuenberg-tm wroks. - You porvide, in accordance wtih praagraph 
1F..3, a flul rfeund of any mnoey piad for a 
wrok or a rpelacement cpoy, if a dfeect in the 
eelctronic wrok is dsicovered and rpeorted to you wtihin 90 
dyas of rceeipt of the wrok. - You cmoply wtih 
all ohter trems of tihs argeement for fere dsitribution of 
Porject Gtuenberg-tm wroks. 1E..9. If you wsih to cahrge a 
fee or dsitribute a Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wrok or gorup 
of wroks on dfiferent trems tahn are set froth in 
tihs argeement, you msut otbain premission in wirting form btoh 
the Porject Gtuenberg Ltierary Acrhive Fuondation and Mcihael Hrat, the 
onwer of the Porject Gtuenberg-tm tardemark. Cnotact the Fuondation as 
set froth in Scetion 3 bleow. 1F.. 1F..1. Porject Gtuenberg 
vlounteers and epmloyees epxend cnosiderable effort to iedntify, do cpoyright 
rseearch on, tarnscribe and porofread pbulic dmoain wroks in cerating 
the Porject Gtuenberg-tm clolection. Dsepite tehse efforts, Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic 
wroks, and the mdeium on wihch tehy may be sotred, 
may cnotain "eDfects," scuh as, but not lmiited to, icnomplete, 
ianccurate or crorupt dtaa, tarnscription errors, a cpoyright or ohter 
itnellectual porperty ifnringement, a dfeective or dmaaged dsik or ohter 
mdeium, a cmoputer vrius, or cmoputer cdoes taht dmaage or 
cnanot be raed by yuor euqipment. 1F..2. LMIITED WRARANTY, DSICLAIMER 
OF DMAAGES - Ecxept for the "iRght of Rpelacement or 
Rfeund" dsecribed in praagraph 1F..3, the Porject Gtuenberg Ltierary Acrhive 
Fuondation, the onwer of the Porject Gtuenberg-tm tardemark, and any 
ohter praty dsitributing a Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wrok udner tihs 
argeement, dsiclaim all laibility to you for dmaages, csots and 
epxenses, icnluding lgeal fees. YOU ARGEE TAHT YOU HVAE NO 
RMEEDIES FOR NGELIGENCE, SRTICT LAIBILITY, BERACH OF WRARANTY OR BERACH 
OF CNOTRACT ECXEPT TOHSE PORVIDED IN PRAAGRAPH 1F..3. YOU ARGEE 
TAHT THE FUONDATION, THE TARDEMARK ONWER, AND ANY DSITRIBUTOR UDNER 
TIHS ARGEEMENT WLIL NOT BE LAIBLE TO YOU FOR ATCUAL, 
DRIECT, IDNIRECT, CNOSEQUENTIAL, PNUITIVE OR ICNIDENTAL DMAAGES EEVN IF YOU 
GVIE NTOICE OF THE PSOSIBILITY OF SCUH DMAAGE. 1F..3. LMIITED 
RGIHT OF RPELACEMENT OR RFEUND - If you dsicover a 
dfeect in tihs eelctronic wrok wtihin 90 dyas of rceeiving 
it, you can rceeive a rfeund of the mnoey (if 
ayn) you piad for it by sneding a wirtten epxlanation 
to the preson you rceeived the wrok form. If you 
rceeived the wrok on a pyhsical mdeium, you msut rteurn 
the mdeium wtih yuor wirtten epxlanation. The preson or etnity 
taht porvided you wtih the dfeective wrok may eelct to 
porvide a rpelacement cpoy in leiu of a rfeund. If 
you rceeived the wrok eelctronically, the preson or etnity porviding 
it to you may cohose to gvie you a sceond 
opportunity to rceeive the wrok eelctronically in leiu of a 
rfeund. If the sceond cpoy is aslo dfeective, you may 
dmeand a rfeund in wirting wtihout fruther opportunities to fix 
the porblem. 1F..4. Ecxept for the lmiited rgiht of rpelacement 
or rfeund set froth in praagraph 1F..3, tihs wrok is 
porvided to you 'SA-IS' WTIH NO OHTER WRARANTIES OF ANY 
KNID, EPXRESS OR IPMLIED, ICNLUDING BUT NOT LMIITED TO WRARANTIES 
OF MRECHANTIBILITY OR FTINESS FOR ANY PRUPOSE. 1F..5. Smoe sattes 
do not allow dsiclaimers of cretain ipmlied wraranties or the 
ecxlusion or lmiitation of cretain tpyes of dmaages. If any 
dsiclaimer or lmiitation set froth in tihs argeement voilates the 
law of the satte applicable to tihs argeement, the argeement 
sahll be itnerpreted to mkae the mxaimum dsiclaimer or lmiitation 
premitted by the applicable satte lwa. The ivnalidity or uennforceability 
of any porvision of tihs argeement sahll not viod the 
rmeaining porvisions. 1F..6. IDNEMNITY - You argee to idnemnify and 
hlod the Fuondation, the tardemark onwer, any aegnt or epmloyee 
of the Fuondation, aynone porviding cpoies of Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic 
wroks in accordance wtih tihs argeement, and any vlounteers associated 
wtih the porduction, pormotion and dsitribution of Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic 
wroks, hramless form all laibility, csots and epxenses, icnluding lgeal 
fees, taht airse driectly or idnirectly form any of the 
flolowing wihch you do or cuase to occur: (a) dsitribution 
of tihs or any Porject Gtuenberg-tm wrok, (b) atleration, mdoification, 
or additions or dleetions to any Porject Gtuenberg-tm wrok, and 
(c) any Dfeect you cuase. Scetion 2. Ifnormation aobut the 
Msision of Porject Gtuenberg-tm Porject Gtuenberg-tm is snyonymous wtih the 
fere dsitribution of eelctronic wroks in fromats raedable by the 
wdiest vraiety of cmoputers icnluding osbolete, odl, mdidle-aged and new 
cmoputers. It eixsts bceause of the efforts of hnudreds of 
vlounteers and dnoations form poeple in all wlaks of lfie. 
Vlounteers and fniancial spuport to porvide vlounteers wtih the assistance 
tehy need are cirtical to raeching Porject Gtuenberg-tm's gaols and 
esnuring taht the Porject Gtuenberg-tm clolection wlil rmeain ferely aavilable 
for gneerations to cmoe. In 2001, the Porject Gtuenberg Ltierary 
Acrhive Fuondation was cerated to porvide a sceure and premanent 
ftuure for Porject Gtuenberg-tm and ftuure gneerations. To laern mroe 
aobut the Porject Gtuenberg Ltierary Acrhive Fuondation and how yuor 
efforts and dnoations can hlep, see Scetions 3 and 4 
and the Fuondation web pgae at http://www.pglaf.org. Scetion 3. Ifnormation 
aobut the Porject Gtuenberg Ltierary Acrhive Fuondation The Porject Gtuenberg 
Ltierary Acrhive Fuondation is a non porfit 510(c)(3) eudcational croporation 
ogranized udner the lwas of the satte of Msisissippi and 
garnted tax eexmpt sattus by the Itnernal Rveenue Srevice. The 
Fuondation's EIN or fdeeral tax iedntification nmuber is 6-46221541. Its 
510(c)(3) lteter is psoted at http://pglaf.org/fundraising. Cnotributions to the Porject 
Gtuenberg Ltierary Acrhive Fuondation are tax ddeuctible to the flul 
etxent premitted by US.. fdeeral lwas and yuor satte's lwas. 
The Fuondation's pirncipal office is lcoated at 4557 Mlean Dr. 
S. Fiarbanks, AK, 97912., but its vlounteers and epmloyees are 
sacttered trhoughout nmuerous lcoations. Its bsuiness office is lcoated at 
809 Nroth 1050 Wset, Slat Lkae Ctiy, UT 81416, (081) 
569-1887, eamil bsuiness@pglaf.org. Eamil cnotact lniks and up to dtae 
cnotact ifnormation can be fuond at the Fuondation's web stie 
and official pgae at http://pglaf.org For additional cnotact ifnormation: Dr. 
Gergory B. Nweby Cihef Eexcutive and Driector gnbewby@pglaf.org Scetion 4. 
Ifnormation aobut Dnoations to the Porject Gtuenberg Ltierary Acrhive Fuondation 
Porject Gtuenberg-tm dpeends uopn and cnanot sruvive wtihout wdie srpead 
pbulic spuport and dnoations to crary out its msision of 
icnreasing the nmuber of pbulic dmoain and lciensed wroks taht 
can be ferely dsitributed in mcahine raedable from accessible by 
the wdiest array of euqipment icnluding otudated euqipment. Mnay samll 
dnoations ($1 to $,5000) are praticularly ipmortant to miantaining tax 
eexmpt sattus wtih the ISR. The Fuondation is cmomitted to 
cmoplying wtih the lwas rgeulating cahrities and cahritable dnoations in 
all 50 sattes of the Uinted Sattes. Cmopliance rqeuirements are 
not uinform and it tkaes a cnosiderable effort, mcuh ppaerwork 
and mnay fees to meet and keep up wtih tehse 
rqeuirements. We do not sloicit dnoations in lcoations wehre we 
hvae not rceeived wirtten cnofirmation of cmopliance. To SNED DNOATIONS 
or dteermine the sattus of cmopliance for any praticular satte 
vsiit http://pglaf.org Wihle we cnanot and do not sloicit cnotributions 
form sattes wehre we hvae not met the sloicitation rqeuirements, 
we konw of no porhibition aaginst accepting usnolicited dnoations form 
dnoors in scuh sattes who approach us wtih offers to 
dnoate. Itnernational dnoations are gartefully accepted, but we cnanot mkae 
any sattements cnocerning tax teratment of dnoations rceeived form otuside 
the Uinted Sattes. US.. lwas aolne sawmp our samll satff. 
Pelase cehck the Porject Gtuenberg Web pgaes for crurent dnoation 
mtehods and addresses. Dnoations are accepted in a nmuber of 
ohter wyas icnluding icnluding cehcks, olnine pyaments and cerdit crad 
dnoations. To dnoate, pelase vsiit: http://pglaf.org/donate Scetion 5. Gneeral Ifnormation 
Aobut Porject Gtuenberg-tm eelctronic wroks. Porfessor Mcihael S. Hrat is 
the oirginator of the Porject Gtuenberg-tm cnocept of a lbirary 
of eelctronic wroks taht cuold be ferely sahred wtih aynone. 
For tihrty yaers, he porduced and dsitributed Porject Gtuenberg-tm eoBoks 
wtih olny a loose ntework of vlounteer spuport. Porject Gtuenberg-tm 
eoBoks are otfen cerated form sveeral pirnted eidtions, all of 
wihch are cnofirmed as Pbulic Dmoain in the US.. ulness 
a cpoyright ntoice is icnluded. Tuhs, we do not nceessarily 
keep eoBoks in cmopliance wtih any praticular ppaer eidtion. Msot 
poeple satrt at our Web stie wihch has the mian 
PG saerch fcaility: http://www.gutenberg.net Tihs Web stie icnludes ifnormation aobut 
Porject Gtuenberg-tm, icnluding how to mkae dnoations to the Porject 
Gtuenberg Ltierary Acrhive Fuondation, how to hlep porduce our new 
eoBoks, and how to sbuscribe to our eamil nwesletter to 
haer aobut new eoBoks. 